--- Page 29 ---
 
 
 
135 
Trade and 
Environment 2) Write down a short note on Environmental Kuznets Curve hypothesis. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Write down a short note on relationship between Consumption and 
production externalities with international trade.  
 …………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
17.3 TRADE AND CLIMATE CHANGE 
Since nineties, the globalizing forces have significantly enhanced trade flows. 
The growing trade has often been linked to environmental degradation (Copeland 
and Taylor 2004) and climate change concerns (WTO -UNEP 2009). The 
influence of trade flows on cli mate change can be explained with help of three 
effects. First, rise in production and exports may necessitate greater use of energy 
products leading to higher emissions of GHGs, which result in scale effect . 
Secondly, if a country specializes in manufactu ring sectors in general and 
polluting sectors in particular, adverse environmental consequences may follow, 
leading to composition effect. Finally, if economic growth is accompanied by 
stricter emission abatement standards and stronger regulatory policies to contain 
the adverse climate change concerns, a more sustainable scenario might emerge 
through technique effect.  
While literature on trade flows -climate change interrelationship is quite vast, the 
empirical evidence does not offer a clear conclusion. Cross -country studies 
indicate that increased outward orientation generally leads to higher GHGs 
emissions and environmental degradation. In addition to merchandise trade, trade 
in services can also significantly influence CO 2 emissions. Several country -
specific studies have also analyzed the relationship between trade and climate 
change through time series models or case  study-based approach. Evidence on 
emission of methane and other GHGs from agricultural and livestock exports 
have been noted both in developed and developing countries . Positive 
relationship between growing merchandise exports and increased CO 2 emissions 
in several developing countries has also been reported. The possible trade -
emission correlation receives further support from the Pollution Haven 
Hypothesis (PHH) literature, which argues that FDI inflows in a developing 
country may target the pollution-intensive sectors, thereby strengthening both the 
scale and composition effects.   
Another section of the literature however disagrees with these results. For  
instance, while intra -European trade flows results innovation and technology 


--- Page 30 ---
 
 
 
136 
Trade, Growth  
and Development spillovers, their trade with developing countries might lead to GHGs emissions. 
The PHH has been rejected by several studies arguing that it is in the best interest 
of the foreig n investor to bring ‘greener’ technology , rather than extracting the 
advantage of lax environmental standards. Awareness is rising in many 
developing countries in recent period for reducing carbon emissions from trade -
related activities through ISO 14000 certifications, technology upgradation etc. In 
all, while growing importance of technique effect in OECD and other high -
income countries has been noted, the same might be relatively weaker for their 
lower income counterparts. 
17.4 TRADE AND ENVIRONMENT: POLICY AND 
PRACTICE 
The findings of the existing literature indicates that the choice of environmental 
policy instruments for international trade is often constrained by identification of 
stage of pollution generation, i.e., whether the pollution is production-based and / 
or consumption -induced in nature. In addition, environmental externalities of 
international trade could also turn out to be both production and consumption 
related. Trade induced composition effects  influence pollution from pr oduction 
and consumption differently. Moreover, sourcing inputs for production often 
causes environmental problems, which are mostly local. In practice, many of the 
environmental impacts of international trade are local in nature (e.g., water and 
air pollu tion, land degradation, deforestation) and often exporting firms ignore 
local environmental problems to achieve export competitiveness. This in effect 
enables them to have a lower compliance cost for doing business. However, this 
perspective offers a moral  argument to the importing countries for laying 
stringent certification criteria for their imports. It is argued that right choice of 
environmental policy instruments depends on the characteristic of the imported 
goods, in particular, whether they are subs titutes (perfect / imperfect) or 
complements as well as the underlying international market condition for that 
product, i.e., whether perfect competition or monopoly prevails. 
The implications of using environmental tax as a policy instrument have been a 
widely researched area. However, the advantages of linking such measures with 
trade have been debated. If environmental policy instruments are introduced to 
address the causes of environmental degradation based on the principles of 
environmental law (e.g., ‘rectification at source’, ‘precautionary action’, 
‘prevention action’, ‘polluter -pays’), the intervention should occur either at the 
production level and/ or at the consumption level rather than at the trade level. 
While imposition of environmental taxes improves welfare, direct setting of 
standards under certain circumstances may lead to welfare loss. Given the 
institutional capacity, input taxes on polluting inputs could achieve substantial 
abatement while minimizing monitoring costs. These instruments a re, ‘much 
more targeted in the sense that they are likely to achieve substantial abatement of 
pollution while inducing smaller welfare losses, because they have a less -


--- Page 31 ---
 
 
 
137 
Trade and 
Environment distorting impact on the rest of the economy’. The roles of structured fiscal 
policies ( emissions taxes or their cap -and-trade equivalents with allowance 
auctions) for promoting greener economies are desirable. There are 
recommendations to impose tax on coal, oil products, and natural gas, given the 
potential CO2 and local emissions from these sectors. 
Import tariff reduction makes inputs cheaper, which in turn promotes production. 
As such a policy increases the marginal social cost; there is an incentive to 
impose stricter environmental regulations. Conversely, as tariff reduction lowers 
the revenue collection, a case for maintaining a set of weaker regulations arises 
that will lower the compliance cost for domestic players. While the relative 
strengths of the two opposing forces are ambiguous, it is expected that import 
tariff liberalization may not necessarily degrade the environmental scenario. 
One major constraint to implement environmental policy instruments with trade 
objective is that they may lead to capital flight and relocation of firms, with 
growth implications for the host country. The perceived consequences might be 
more severe in case of developing countries and LDCs in general and the Asian 
context in particular. Evidence shows that FDI inflows have often targeted 
polluting industries in line with the PHH phenomenon in several Sou th  
(e.g., India), East (e.g., China) and Southeast (e.g., Malaysia, Thailand, the 
Philippines) Asian countries. In addition, developing economies have limited 
institutional capacity to implement environmental policies which often constrains 
their ability to choose from available policy instruments for environmental 
protection. In face of institutional limitations, developing economies often choose 
tariff / trade barrier to protect domestic environment, though it cannot target 
pollution adequately and it ha s opposite effects on consumption -induced and 
production-based pollution.  
As the converse of the tax policies, there exist a rich literature on provisions of 
subsidies and their implications on exports. Provision of subsidies per se does not 
imply a challenge to environmental sustainability. However, countries often 
provide subsidies in the area of agricultural products and natural resources, as 
well as offering energy subsidies to manufacturing products. Both the routes may 
exert an adverse impact on local sustainability as well as global climate change 
concerns. For instance, subsidy -led adverse environmental impacts are often 
noted in resource -intensive sectors like primary activities (e.g., agriculture, 
fisheries), transport, energy and water, etc. Also, greater fiscal devolution is often 
associated with rise in increasing forest land clearing for agricultural production . 
Fuel subsidies received by fishing trawlers and other vessels often lead to 
overuse of mineral fuels and over -fishing. , The provision of fuel subsidies to the 
iron and steel industries in China, is another case in point. On the whole, it is 
observed that higher budgetary spending generally leads to rise in CO2 emissions.  
In the existing literature there is no com mon consensus that international trade is 
detrimental for environment and the results are sensitive to different countries 


--- Page 32 ---
 
 
 
138 
Trade, Growth  
and Development and pollutants. For instance, there are many studies which support PHH but many 
studies refute it too. Often the findings are conting ent on choice of methodology 
for data analysis. Larger data availability for a broad set of pollutants for many 
years and countries could facilitate generalization of the findings. In presence of 
these constraints, adopting proactive actions to mitigate gl obal environmental 
problems like GHGs emissions often lead to adoption of environmental policy 
instruments to negate the environmental impacts of international trade. 
Underlying economic rationality behind adoption of these environmental policy 
instruments is that they could take into account the differences between social 
and private marginal costs of production relating to international trade -related 
activities and at the best could capture the marginal cost of abatement of 
pollution. However, the design of environmental policy instrument plays an 
important role, given its potential to distort the market conditions and possible 
emergence as trade barriers.  
The compliance cost related concerns on competitiveness may overshadow the 
actions of key players, t hereby affecting the process of both trade as well as 
climate change negotiations.  
The perceived need for imposing border trade adjustments (BTAs) on imports for 
tackling global climate change concerns are increasingly being explored by the 
countries in this context and a rich literature on this front has come up. BTAs can 
be defined as, ‘requiring trade taxes to partially reflect emission leakage effect 
arising from asymmetric environmental policies or, more narrowly, as requiring 
trade taxes to specifically embody a nation’s carbon tax on the carbon content of 
imports’. BTAs are instruments to provide a level playing field to domestic 
producers where environmental standards are stringent. In practice, BTAs are 
charged on imports equivalent to what domesti c producers pay to protect the 
environment and exporters are rebated for the cost they incur.  
The impacts of BTAs are ambiguous as on one hand, they can potentially solve 
the problem of carbon leakage, encourage developing countries to protect global 
environment, help to achieve economic efficiency in carbon abatement, improve 
global welfare as it transfers carbon pricing, address the competitiveness 
concerns of developed countries, but also may inflict damage upon the trade of 
developing countries on the other. Many scholars acknowledge the importance of 
intervention on the part of the importing country given the fact that carbon prices 
differ internationally and carbon taxes in some countries might be constrained. It 
further argued adding to the policy de bate that the, ‘efficiency case for BTA 
depends critically on whether climate policies are pursued by carbon taxation or 
by cap -and-trade’. Scholars also support the imposition of BTAs, given the 
potential incentive for countries to weaken their standards to enhance their 
market access.  


--- Page 33 ---
 
 
 
139 
Trade and 
Environment Check Your Progress 2 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Explain the role of an effective environment policy in reducing 
environmental hazards. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Explain the major constraint to implement environmental policy instruments. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
17.5  ROLE OF WTO TO SAFEGUARD 
ENVIRONMENT 
The role of WTO in achieving sustainable development and protecting 
environment is explained in the following WTO statement:  
“Allowing for the optimal use of the world’s resources in accordance 
with the objective of sustainable development and seeking to protect and 
preserve the environment are fundamental to the WTO. These goals, 
enshrined in the Preamble of the Marrakesh Agreement, go hand in hand 
with the WTO’s objective to reduce trade barriers and eliminate 
discriminatory treatment in international tr ade relations. For WTO 
members, the aims of upholding and safeguarding an open and non -
discriminatory multilateral trading system, on the one hand, and acting 
for the protection of the environment and the promotion of sustainable 
development, on the other, can and must be mutually supportive.”3 
Ensuring that trade contributes to sustainable development is an explicit objective 
of the WTO and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (including the 
Sustainable Development Goals or ‘SDGs’). However, one area of concern is that 
the legal provisions of the multilateral trade regime, i.e., World Trade 
Organization (WTO), were not originally created to deliberate on climate change 
policies and sustainability challenges . While on one hand the text of the WTO 
Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) and Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) 
agreements advocate against the use of unilateral trade policies and base the 
 
3 An introduction to trade and environment in the WTO, available online at: https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/envir_e/envt_intro_e.htm (last 
accessed on 31 July 2017).  


--- Page 34 ---
 
 
 
140 
Trade, Growth  
and Development actions on ‘scientific evidence’, the ‘precautionary principles’ based on the 
occurrence of ‘irreversible dama ge’ are also enshrined among the provisions. 4 
The non -recognition of ‘polluter -pays-principle’ by international trade 
institutions pose a challenge for imposing unilateral policies addressing cross -
border sustainability challenges. The analysis further noted that as such bodies do 
not recognize the economic equivalence of emission tax and permit regimes, the 
resulting complexities make certain environmental policies susceptible to 
influence by protectionist motives. Hence the WTO-compatibility of BTAs is still 
open to debate.  
So far, the analysis presents a case for importing countries to impose stricter 
environmental standards to support the climate change concerns and to protect 
the competitive concerns of the domestic players on the other. Nevertheless,  the 
possibility of such measures functioning as de facto non-tariff barriers (NTBs) on 
exports of developing countries has been raised at times. In order to comply with 
strict environmental standards in the ‘North’, the producers in ‘South’ need to 
undertake compliance costs on multiple fronts, which may lead to loss of their 
competitiveness. If a developing country is forced to adopt a stricter 
environmental standard set by an external entity for exporting, its export sector 
suffers adversely. The underlying motive behind imposition of such standards has 
also been questioned. Higher standards imposed by developed countries always 
increase their domestic firms' profitability, but reduce the same for firms located 
in developing countries. In addition, it has  been argued that unilateral 
environmental actions / sanctions are generally ineffective as an enforcement 
device. 
The other branch of literature has noted that the stringent environmental 
standards have significantly improved the sustainability scenario i n the South. 
For instance, ISO 14001 certification on environmental management awards has 
witnessed a 1,500 per cent increase between 1999 and 2009. The adverse effects 
on exports have also been questioned. It has been shown in the Chinese context 
that barring the exception of chemical industry, stricter environmental regulation 
has not adversely influenced the export potential. On the contrary, the quality of 
exports from both resource -intensive primary and high -value-added 
manufacturing sectors has improved. 
In the past, trade and environment related disputes have been raised at the WTO 
dispute settlement forums and a ‘North’ move towards BTAs would only 
increase the number further. Given the absence of a clear understandings and 
agreement at the global le vel on managing the climate change effects through 
trade instruments, it is clear that the discord over environmental issues may lead 
 
4 In principle, sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures aim to protect the health of humans, plants and animals, while technical barriers to 
trade (TBT) ensure product quality and safety. However, governments may overshoot the requirements of health and consumer safety and use 
SPS and TBT to shield domestic producers from fair competition. 


--- Page 35 ---
 
 
 
141 
Trade and 
Environment to welfare loss. The WTO case law has provided a mixed view so far. For 
instance, certain aspects of the verdict in DS 58 5 pave the way for increasing 
incidence of unilateral trade sanctions in the future. On the other hand, by 
disapproving the unilateral action of the EU in the biotech case (DS 291 -293)6, a 
strong message against adoption of such measures has been sent. Ta king note of 
the legal issues yet to be resolved under WTO, the need to enable and encourage 
good policymaking is warranted. 
The potential for a country to use voluntary export restraints (VERs) on its 
exports with sustainability undercurrent has recently been observed at WTO in 
the rare earth  dispute. China’s decision to limit export of rare earth materials, 
which are crucial sub -components for electronics and other high -tech products, 
citing their overexploitation was met by protests from countries where the 
domestic industries were crucially dependent on Chinese imports. Disputes were 
lodged at the WTO against the Chinese adoption of various policy instruments to 
further this goal: export duties, export quotas, export licensing and minimum 
export price requirements. WTO Dispute Settlement Panel ruled against China by 
noting that some of their instruments were geared to achieve industrial policy 
objectives rather than sustainability. 7  The precedence of this case will have 
profound implications for other trade-environment disputes lodged at the WTO in 
days to come.  
Protection of environment and promotion of sustainable development (SD) is one 
of the mandates of WTO (WTO undated). The e nvironmental provisions are also 
enshrined under several WTO agreements. A change in the existing provisions is 
however the need of the hour. There are four specific areas for this purpose – 
allowing production subsidies for certain green products and tech nologies; 
arriving at a possible compromise on BTA based on carbon content in domestic 
production, removing / relaxing existing restrictions on exports of natural gas to 
facilitate substitution of dirtier substitutes like oil and coal, and tightening 
compulsory license mechanism for green technologies in emerging economies. 
The third point becomes particularly important, as a number of Asian countries 
 
5 See, Dispute Settlement Case No. 58, United States — Import Prohibition of Certain Shrimp 
and Shrimp Products (complaint by India; Malaysia; Pakistan; Thailand) for details. 
6 See, Dispute Settlement Case No. 291-293, European Communities — Measures Affecting 
the Approval and Marketing of Biotech Products (complaint by United States; Canada; 
Argentina) for details. 
7 For details see, Dispute Settlement Case No. 431, China – Measures related to the 
Exportation of Rare Earths, Tungsten and Molybdenum (Complainant: United States); 
Dispute Settlement Case No. 432, China – Measures related to the Exportation of Rare 
Earths, Tungsten and Molybdenum (Complainant: European Union); Dispute Settlement 
Case No. 433, China – Measures related to the Exportation of Rare Earths, Tungsten and 
Molybdenum (Complainant: Japan). 


--- Page 36 ---
 
 
 
142 
Trade, Growth  
and Development have recently been at the WTO dispute settlement forums on the ground of 
support to the renewable energy sector.8 
17.6  MULTILATERAL ENVIRONMENT 
AGREEMENTS AND TRADE 
The role of international cooperation (agreement) is inevitable for many 
environmental problems. The first international treaty on trade and environment 
was the Phylloxera Agreement of 1978 to restrict trade in grapevines to prevent 
the spread of pests tha t damage vineyards. In response to emerging 
environmental challenges, a large number of multilateral environmental 
agreements (MEAs) were mooted to minimize the trade related impacts on 
environment and natural resources. These agreements played important r ole in 
conservation of natural resources and biodiversity, protecting endangered 
species, and minimizing spillover of hazardous substances and environmental 
problems across countries. About 17 MEAs were identified by GATT (1992) to 
contain trade measures, starting in 1933. However, each of these have not ratified 
by all the countries. Major MEAs having bearing on trade and environment are as 
follows:  
• International Convention for the Protection of Birds (1950) 
• International Plant Protection Agreement (1951) 
• Convention on Conservation of North Pacific Fur Seals (1957) 
• Agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Quarantine of Plants and their 
Protection against Pests and Diseases (1959) 
• Rio International Convention for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas 
(ICCAT) (1966) 
• Phyto-sanitary Convention for Africa (1967) 
• The African Convention on the Conservation of Nature and Natural 
Resources (1968) 
• The Benelux Convention of on the Hunting and Protection of Birds (1970) 
• Convention on International Trade in Endangered Speci es (CITES) of Wild 
Fauna and Flora (1973)     
• Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer (1987) 
 
8 For details see, Dispute Settlement Case No. 412, Canada — Certain Measures Affecting the 
Renewable Energy Generation Sector (complaint by Japan); Dispute Settlement Case No. 
419, China — Measures concerning wind power equipment  (complaint by United States); 
Dispute Settlement Case No. 456, India — Certain Measures Relating to Solar Cells 
and Solar Modules (Complainant: United States).  


--- Page 37 ---
 
 
 
143 
Trade and 
Environment • Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous 
Wastes and their Disposal (1989) 
• Convention for the Prohibition of Fishing with Long Driftness in the South 
Pacific (Wellington Convention) (1990) 
• Antarctica Treaty (1991)  
• Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) 
• Convention on Straddling and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks (1995)  
• Kyoto Protocol on Climate Change (1997)  
• Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (2001) 
• Convention on Biological Diversity (2002)  
• Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (2003)      
Since all MEAs are not compatible with WTO rules, the precedence of 
international agreements in case of conflict is a matter of debate.  
Check Your Progress 3 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Comment on the role of WTO in safeguarding environment.. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Explain the major multilateral agreements to control environmental 
degradation. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
17.7  LET US SUM UP 
In this unit , we discussed about linkages between trade and environment.  
International trade itself may not automatically correct the distortions in prices, 
thereby making environmental policy instruments one of the options available. 
Achieving high economic growth and exports, creating jobs, etc. are often the 
foremost priorities compared to protecting the environment for many developing 
and emerging economies in the world, and the Asian economies are no exception 
to this trend. Therefore, there is lack of seriousness to implement commitments 
made in multilateral environmental agreements. Though regional forums exist to 
discuss sustainability concerns, the working of the same in the South is still in the 


--- Page 38 ---
 
 
 
144 
Trade, Growth  
and Development evolving stage. While environmental sustainability has been included among the 
areas of cooperation in the Asian regional trad e agreements (RTAs), they are still 
not appropriate forums to hold a country for particular domestic environmental 
concerns. The contrast with inclusion of environmental provisions under North 
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) or the EU Economic Partne rship 
Agreements (EPAs) is clearly observed. This is one area for the Asian countries 
to deepen regional cooperation. Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership  
(RCEP) may play a key role in this regard.   
As several Asian countries are now facing environmental compliance 
requirements in developed countries, which often function as NTBs their exports, 
there is a visible move towards carbon tax regimes - e.g., pilot emissions trading 
schemes (ETS) at municipa l and provincial levels in China, introduction of ETS 
in South Korea, introduction of the tax for climate change mitigation and 
voluntary emissions trading scheme in Japan, implementation of clean 
development mechanism (CDM) projects and a domestic volunta ry carbon 
market in Vietnam, introduction of coal cess and pilot ETS for air pollutants in 
India, the proposed ETS in Indonesia and Thailand. It is expected that in the 
coming days, more Asian countries would be interested to tread along the path of 
environmental policy instruments for two reasons. First, as the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) negotiation intensifies, 
the Asian countries would also be compelled to fulfill their commitments. 
Second, the need to secure the expor t market may cause them to tighten their 
environmental norms and policy instruments, increasingly aligning the same with 
the requirements prevailing in their developed counterparts. 
17.8  KEY WORDS 
Environmental hazards  An environmental hazard  is a substance, state 
or event which has the potential to threaten the 
surrounding natural environment / or adversely 
affect people's health, including pollution and 
natural disasters such as storms and 
earthquakes. 
Greenhouse gases A greenhouse gas is a  gas in an atmosphere 
that absorbs and emits radiant energy within 
the thermal infrared range. This process is the 
fundamental cause of the greenhouse effect.  
Environmental Kuznets 
Curve hypothesis 
The Environmental Kuznets Curve  (EKC) 
hypothesis postulates an inverted -U-shaped 
relationship between different pollutants and 
per capita income, i.e., environmental pressure 
increases up to a certain level as income goes 
up; after that, it decreases 
