--- Page 1 ---
 
 
 
107 
Debate on the Trade 
and Growth Nexus  
 
 
 
BLOCK 7 
 
 
TRADE, GROWTH  
AND DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Unit 16 Debate on the Trade and Growth Nexus 
Unit 17 Trade and Environment 


--- Page 2 ---
 
 
 
108 
Trade, Growth  
and Development BLOCK INTRODUCTION 
This block is on Trade, Growth and Development. It has two units, i.e., Unit 16 - Trade 
and Economic Growth Nexus and Unit 17 – Trade and Environment.  
Unit 16 provides us an understanding of the link between the economic growth and trade. In 
order to do so, the unit starts with the discussion on the importance of economic growth with 
reference to the theoretical underpinnings in terms of classical and endogenous models, trade 
and Solow model, trade and productivity growth. The unit moves in the direction of 
explaining various trade policy regimes vis -à-vis growth in developing countries wherein the 
import substitution and outward oriented development strategies are discussed. At the end of 
the unit, India’s experience with the inward -oriented and outward -oriented regime is 
presented.  
Unit 17 takes the  theme ahead by providing us the link between trade and environment 
wherein the role of externalities has been outlined. The unit also discusses the link of trade 
with climate change and the policies and practices in that regards. The relevance of WTO in 
safeguarding the environment has been highlighted and, in the end, the multilateral 
environmental agreements in relation to trade are discussed.  
 
 
 
 
 
  


--- Page 3 ---
 
 
 
109 
Debate on the Trade 
and Growth Nexus UNIT 16  DEBATE ON THE TRADE AND GROWTH 
NEXUS  
Structure 
16.0 Objectives 
16.1  Introduction  
16.2 Importance of Economic Growth 
16.3 Sources of Economic Growth: Theoretical Underpinnings 
 16.3.1 Theories of Growth: Classical and Endogenous Growth Models  
 16.3.2 Trade and Growth in the Solow Model 
 16.3.3 Trade and Productivity Growth: Theoretical Links 
16.4 Trade Policy Regime and Growth in Developing Economies 
 16.4.1 Criticism of Primary-Export-Led Growth Policies 
 16.4.2 Import Substitution Industrialisation Strategy 
  16.4.2.1  Country Experiences  
  16.4.2.2  Criticism of ISI 
 16.4.3 Outward Oriented Development Strategies 
  16.4.3.1Country Experiences  
  16.4.3.2Critical Evaluation 
16.5 Indian Experience 
16.5.1 Experience with the Inward-Oriented Industrialisation Regime 
16.5.2  Experience with the Outward Oriented Liberalisation Regime  
16.6     Let Us Sum Up 
16.7 Key Words 
16.8 Some Useful References 
16.9 Answers/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
16.0  OBJECTIVES 
After studying this Unit, you should be able to:  
• Explore the relevance, nature and determinant of economic growth in general; 
• Examine the relationship between international trade and economic growth in 
classical and endogenous growth theories; 
• Identify the link between international trade and productivity growth; 
 
 Contributed by  Dr. Rijesh Raju, Institute for Studies in Industrial Development (ISID). 


--- Page 4 ---
 
 
 
110 
Trade, Growth  
and Development • Discuss the issue of trade and growth nexus in the light of trade policy regime 
in developing countries; 
• Highlight the transition and country-level experiences of import substitution 
and outward-oriented policy regimes; and 
• Provide an overview of the trade policy regime and growth experience of 
Indian economy since economic planning. 
16.1   INTRODUCTION 
Economic growth is of fundamental significance for any economy. An economy 
is said to grow when the amount of goods and services produced in the country 
expands over time. The total amount of output produced for final consumption in 
a particular period, normally a year or the economy's income level is referred to 
as Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Since every economy experiences growth in 
labour force/population, improving the ra te of growth of GDP matters most for 
achieving sustained higher standards of living in the long run. In this sense, GDP 
is measured by the rate of change of real income per capita or simply, output per 
labour input (i.e., labour productivity). In this unit, we will learn how growth rate 
of an economy is related with its trade volume. We will try to understand how it 
affects each other.  
16.2  IMPORTANCE OF ECONOMIC GROWTH 
Economists argue that growth in GDP enables an economy to improve the overall 
welfare of the people and economic development. We know that the welfare of 
the citizen ultimately depends on improvement in  the quality of life, including 
higher levels of cons umption, better educational achievements, quality housing 
and better access to valuable health facilities.Since a sustained level of economic 
growth is highly correlated with higher standard of living and economic welfare, 
GDP growth is often considered as  a key instrument (or means) for achieving 
economic development (the end goal).  
Rather than the level of GDP, it is the rate of increase in GDP which matters 
most. This is because of the well -established evidence that points out that 
prolonged differences in GDP growth rates result in dramatic changes in living 
standards. One useful summary measure to appreciate the significance of rate of 
GDP growth is to find out the number of years it will take the size of the 
economy to double over time. According to a  simple approximation of time, the 
number of years it takes for an economy to double its level is equal to 70 divided 
by the growth rate. This is known as "Rule of 70" . According to this rule, an 
economy with a GDP growth rate of 1 per cent doubles its liv ing standard (i.e., 
doubles the economy's overall size) every seventy years, while an economy with 
a rate of growth of 5 per cent per annum doubles its size and living standard 
every fourteen years.  


--- Page 5 ---
 
 
 
111 
Debate on the Trade 
and Growth Nexus Examples of such drastic differences in growth rates among countries are 
numerous. For example, in the mid-1950s, the per capita GDP of El Salvador and 
Japan were roughly similar. However, by 1993, the income of one Japanese 
person was approximately equal to that of 24 Salvadorans, which was achieved 
through a sustained level of per capita growth rate of less than 9 per cent per 
annum maintained over 38 years by the Japanese economy. This example 
illustrates that a percentage point drop in the growth rate makes a huge difference 
in the long period. Therefore, it  is important to appreciate and understand the 
factors determining the rate of growth in GDP in an economy. In the following 
Section, we will attempt to provide an answer based on the standard theories of 
economic growth.  
16.3  SOURCES OF ECONOMIC GROWTH: 
THEORETICAL UNDERPINNINGS 
16.3.1 Theories of Growth: Classical and Endogenous Growth 
Models 
Identifying the sources of income generation is one of the main focuses of the 
growth and development theories. An early attempt to understand the principal 
source of economic growth is attributed to the work of Prof. Robert Solow1 in the 
early 1950s. The Classical Growth Theory , based on the work of Solow and 
many others, have tried  to disentangle the contribution of growth in physical 
capital stock, growth in the labour supply and state of technology in generating 
income per capita over time.  
Using the standard production function approach, the classical theories argue that 
in the long period, the rate of savings determines the size of capital stock and 
thus the level of output. The model predicts that an increase in saving rates will 
have a correspondin g level effect on income per person (labour productivity) as 
output expands, but will eventually reach a steady state 2  equilibrium level. 
Alternatively, an increase in labour supply or population growth will negatively 
impact the steady -state levels of bo th capital per worker and output per worker. 
The Solow model predicts that regardless of the availability of factor inputs, the 
economy will tend to move towards a steady state long run equilibrium level. 
Since the level of savings determines the stock of capital, a large supply of 
savings allows the accumulation of productive capital and a higher output level in 
the steady state. However, once the economy reaches the steady state, policy 
 
1The Solow growth model is named after Robert M. Solow on his work on the accounting the 
sources of economic growth in the 1950s. The model was introduced in the paper Solow, R. M. 
(1956). A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth. The Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, 70(1), 65-94. In 1987, Solow won the Nobel Prize in economics for his work on 
economic growth. 
2 Steady state is a condition in which the key economic variables are constant and does not 
deviate.  


--- Page 6 ---
 
 
 
112 
Trade, Growth  
and Development instruments are needed to alter the steady -state growth rate of incom e per person 
to have a growth-effect over time. In effect, the policy option is to choose the 
steady state that provides maximum welfare to the society in terms of the 
availability of goods and services for consumption. The steady -state level of 
capital stock that maximises the level of consumption is called Golden Rule Level 
of Capital. The classical models show that if the level of capital stock is larger 
than the Golden rule steady state, then policies that reduce saving will increase 
consumption at all time periods. 
However, since the capital stock is subject to decreasing returns, the capital 
accumulation itself cannot sustain the growth rate, as a continuous rise in output 
per worker requires a far greater increase in capital per worker. Naturally, ove r 
time, the economy may be subject to saving rate constraint and limit further 
accumulation of productive capital. In this case, for sustainable economic 
growth,it is necessary to have a continuous progress in the state of art of 
technology in production. Accordingly, the classical theories build models 
including exogenous technological progress, which over time expands the 
society’s production capabilities. 
A fundamental way to incorporate exogenous technological change is to assume 
that technology is embo died in workers skill that increases the efficiency of 
labour. As society’s knowledge pool increases, the efficiency of labour increases 
and the labour per hour output of goods and services expands considerably. The 
exogenous rise in labour efficiency can result from new assembly line production 
methods, labour training, health, education skills, etc. In this labour augmenting 
technological progress model, the technological change causes the effective 
number of productive labours to increase over time. Ther efore, at the steady state 
level of capital per effective labour, the rates of actual output per labour increases 
at the rate of labour augmenting technical progress. Thus, according to the Solow 
model, once the economy reaches the steady state equilibrium , the rate of growth 
of output per worker depends only on the rate of technological progress. In the 
long run, the level of technological progress  explains sustained growth and 
persistent rise of standard of living in an economy. 
The classical growth theor ies show clearly that the sustained output growth per 
worker requires continuous progress in the state of art of technology. The Solow 
model, however, considered technical change as exogenous; the model does not 
explain the determinant of technology. As such, the model often failed to account 
for many empirical realities such as cross -country income convergence, 
international migration pattern and large flow of capital across countries.  The 
limitation of the Solow model in explaining the growth experience s of both the 
developed and the developing world prompted economists to formulate models 
that treat as endogenous the generation and diffusion of technology. The models 
that reject the over simplifying assumption of exogenous technology and explain 


--- Page 7 ---
 
 
 
113 
Debate on the Trade 
and Growth Nexus the determinant of technological advances is known as the Endogenous Growth 
Theory. 
The endogenous theoretical models were developed since the 1980s by the 
scholarly writings of Paul M. Romer, Robert E. Lucas, Jr, among others. 3Instead 
of assuming diminishing returns for physical capital stock, the basic endogenous 
model incorporates knowledge as a form of capital with constant returns to scale. 
These models try to explain the decisions that determine knowledge creation 
through Research and Development (R&D). A main feature of the endogenous 
growth model is that they treat research as an economic activity that requires 
productive input resources that respond to profit opportunities. In the earlier 
models of Romer and others, techn ological progress arises from purposeful 
investment by the profit -seeking firms in R&D and externalities (spill over 
effects) from such activities. Since technological knowledge is a non -rival and 
partially excludable commodity, the spill over channel play s an important role in 
determining the rate of growth of economies over time. 
16.3.2  Trade and Growth in the Solow Model 
We can use the Solow model to depict the effect of international trade on 
economic growth. Here we will follow the model proposed by B aldwin (1992)4. 
Under the standard models of international trade, a shift from autarky to free 
trade increases the real income and welfare in an economy. Assuming the country 
produces two commodities, the Heckscher -Ohlin (H -O) model of trade shows 
that opening up of tra de increases the real income. This is depicted by the 
production Possibility Frontier (PPF) movement where the nation specialises and 
reallocates resources in commodities that have a relative (comparative) cost 
advantage, determined by factor endowments. T he specialisation pattern also 
allows consumer welfare to rise because compared to the situation in autarky, the 
consumption points of both commodities in free trade lie under a higher 
indifference curve. 
According to Baldwin (1992), a one -time improvement in welfare from autarky 
to free trade generates a secondary improvement in real output. The secondary 
improvement results from increased productive efficiency that transforms 
available (given) inputs into welfare -enhancing final products. This productivit y 
improvement shifts the PPF in the Solow model and generates economic growth 
as economy shifts up to a higher steady state equilibrium level of capital and 
output.  
 
 
3 See Romer, P. M. (1986). Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth. Journal of Political 
Economy, 94(5), 1002-1037; and Lucas, R. E. (1988). On the Mechanics of Economic 
Development. Journal of Monetary Economics, 22(1), 3-42. 
4The full reference for the paper is: Baldwin, R. E. (1992). Measurable Dynamic Gains from 
Trade,. Journal of Political Economy, 100(1), 162-174. 


--- Page 8 ---
 
 
 
114 
Trade, Growth  
and Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 16.1 International Trade and Solow Growth Model 
Source: Adapted from Berg and Lewer (2007) 
The process of trade under the Solow growth model is represented in Figure 16.1. 
The international exchange of goods induces the PPF curve to shift from f(k) to 
g(k). This changes the economy's steady state capital -output ratio and per capita 
income from 𝑘1
∗ and 𝑦1
∗ to 𝑘2
∗ and 𝑦2
∗, respectively. These changes are the result of 
an immediate increase in per worker output from 𝑦1
∗ to 𝑦2
∗ before the changes in 
capital-output ratio. The change in 𝑦1
∗ to 𝑦2
∗ is the Static Gains from participating 
in International Trade. However, the economy may further increase the gains 
from trade provided an increase in real income is associated with a rise in 
economy's saving functions. In this case, the steady state equilibrium shifts 
upward and g enerates a secondary spurt of medium -run growth that allows the 
economy to move to the new steady state equilibrium at 𝑘2
∗ and 𝑦3
∗. The medium-
run spurt may be influenced by the composition of trade, namely, whether a 
country’s comparative advantage belo ngs to the production of capital goods or 
consumer goods. However, this model shows that the traditional gains from trade 
is not permanent as the economy eventually reaches and settles at the new steady 
state equilibrium.  
However, instead of the level eff ects, the new growth theory and theoretical 
advancements in trade provides several plausible channels through which 
international trade can induce sustained growth effects. Based on the theoretical 
literature, we provide a brief overview of the plausible c hannels through which 
trade impacts productivity in the following sub-section. 
𝝈 g (k) 
 
𝒚𝟐
∗ 
 
g (k) 
 
𝒚𝟑
∗ 
 
𝒚𝟏
∗ 
 
𝒌𝟏
∗  
 
𝒌𝟐
∗  
 
f (k) 
 
𝜹 (k) 
 
𝝈 f (k) 
 


--- Page 9 ---
 
 
 
115 
Debate on the Trade 
and Growth Nexus 16.3.3  Trade and Productivity Growth: Theoretical Links 
The theoretical literature has identified several channels through which 
international trade impacts domestic productivi ty growth 5. International trade 
allows domestic producers to achieve economies of scale effects relative to 
autarky. Economies of scale are realised as production moves at a lower average 
unit cost curve through the reduction of average fixed cost per unit of output and 
a downward shift of cost curve resulting from additional fixed investments made 
to meet the additional expectation of market opportunities abroad. Compared to 
autarky, a liberal trade regime induces market competition effects that boost firm 
efficiency. The entry of foreign competitive products acts as a market 
disciplining effect on i mport-competing domestic firms. For market survival, 
firms will be forced to invest in cost reducing activities such as technology 
upgradation, skill development and reduce managerial slackness. The exit of 
inefficient firm and reduction in monopoly power will eliminate X -inefficiency. 
The lower priced imports improve productivity through investment in R&D, 
corporate restructuring, and learning from foreign products.  
Trade allows countries to specialise and follow their true comparative advantage. 
The trad itional trade theory envisages inter -industry specialisation, whereas 
recent theories predict large scale within sector production reallocation from less 
efficient and more productive firms. The resource reallocation effects , induced 
by plant -level heterog eneity, will provide substantial dynamic productivity 
benefits. Since exporting involves heavy sunk -cost, it is argued that only 
productive firms will enter in the export market. As exporting firms share 
increases, the average industry productivity improve s. Finally, international trade 
acts as a vehicle of transmission of knowledge to the recipient economy. As we 
noted in the earlier section, trade provides technology spill over effects  that 
augment aggregate knowledge stock.  
So far, we have discussed the  theoretical channels through which international 
trade augments economic growth in an economy. In practice, countries use 
different policy instruments to either participate or restrict the flow of goods and 
services across borders. As such, the nature of trade policy initiatives adopted by 
the government has important implications on the pattern of trade and growth for 
the development of catch-up developing economies.  
 
 
5For a detailed discussion and literature survey, see the following articles (a) Rijesh, R. (2017) 
International Trade and Productivity Growth: Evidence from the Organised Manufacturing Sector 
in India’, ISID Working Paper 198, Institute for Studies in Industrial Development, New Delhi; 
and (b) Singh, T. (2010). Does International Trade Cause Economic Growth? A Survey. The 
World Economy, 33(11), 1517-1564.  


--- Page 10 ---
 
 
 
116 
Trade, Growth  
and Development Check Your Progress 1 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Why is it important to understand the factors determining the rate of growth 
in GDP in an economy? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) How can we use the Solow model to depict the effect of international trade on 
economic growth? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Highlight the theoretical links between trade and productivity growth.  
 …………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
16.4 TRADE POLICY REGIME AND GROWTH IN 
DEVELOPING ECONOMIES 
The successful industrialisation of the western economies has forced the policy 
makers in the less developed economies to plan appropriate strategy for catch -up 
and development. Since, by definition, the less income countries have low 
purchasing power, the industrial development process is naturally constrained by 
insufficient market demand. The market constraints will lead to underutilisation 
of economic resources, especially in which the country has comparative 
advantage, especially from the availability of fertile land and resources. We know 
that most of the low -income countries have abundant natural resources that are 
ideal for producing resource -or labour -intensive products. Since increasing 
market access allows countries to specialise according to comp arative advantage, 
producing and exporting labour -intensive products involves a Primary-Export-
Led Development Strategy . This involves the support of the government to 
design policies that favour exploitation of natural comparative advantage in 
exchange of manufactured goods produced in the rest of the world.  
The primary export -led growth strategy based on a country’s natural economic 
resources is perceived to improve economic welfare as the production sector 
specialises and resources are reallocated accor ding to the static gains from trade. 
