--- Page 21 ---
 
 
 
127 
Debate on the Trade 
and Growth Nexus Malaysia, Singapor e, South Korea, Taiwan 
and Thailand as This High -Performance 
Asian Economies. 
16.8 SOME USEFUL REFERENCES 
Gerber, James (2014) ‘ International Economics ’, Sixth Edition, Pearson 
Education, Inc. 
Helpman, Elhanan (2004) 'The Mystery of Economic Growth' , The Beknap Press 
of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts and London, England. 
Mankiw Gregory N. (2016) " Macroeconomics", 9 th Edition, Worth Publishers, 
USA. 
Pugel, A.Thomas (2007), 'International Economics'  16th Edition, McGraw -Hill 
Education, , New York 
Sodersten Bo and Geoffrey Reed (1994) ' International Economics' , Third 
Edition, Macmillan Press Limited. 
Steven Husted and Michael Melvin (2013) ‘ International Economics’ , Ninth 
Edition, Pearson Education, Inc., publishing as Addison-Wesley.  
Van den Berg, H., &  Lewer, J. J. (2007) ' International Trade and Economic 
Growth', Me Sharpe, Inc. 
World Bank. (1993). ' The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public 
Policy'. New York: Oxford University Press.  
16.9 ANSWERS/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES  
Check Your Progress 1 
1) See Section 16.2 
2) See sub-section 16.3.2 
3) See sub-section 16.3.3 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) See sub-section 16.4.2 
2) See sub-section 16.4.3 
3) See sub-section 16.5.1 
 


--- Page 22 ---
 
 
 
128 
Trade, Growth  
and Development 
UNIT 17 TRADE AND ENVIRONMENT  
Structure 
17.0  Objective  
17. 1  Introduction  
17. 2  Trade and Environment: Linkages 
17.2.1 Trade and Externalities 
17. 3  Trade and Climate Change  
17.4  Trade and Environment: Policy and Practice  
17.5  Role of WTO to Safeguard Environment  
17.6  Multilateral Environment Agreements and Trade  
17.7  Let us Sum Up 
17.8  Key Words 
17.9  Some Useful Readings  
17.10  Answers/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
17.0  OBJECTIVES 
After studying this Unit, you should be able to:  
• Explain how trade and environment are related to each other;  
• Describe the impact of trade on the environment; 
• Discuss the policies related to trade and environment;  
• Explain the role of the international agencies in protecting trade and 
environment; and 
• Describe the various agreements signed between various nations on the area 
of trade and environment. 
17.1   INTRODUCTION 
With the increase in the volume of the world po pulation, many issues have 
evolved. One of them is the relationship between trade and the environment. Is 
trade good or bad for the environment? The answer is not that straight. There are 
some environmental effects when producing goods that are exported to  other 
nations or imported from other nations. But will these effects increase or decrease 
with expanded trade? What is their impact on the exporting nation, the importing 
 
 Contributed by  Prof. S.N. Mukherjee, National Institute of Public Finance and Policy 


--- Page 23 ---
 
 
 
129 
Trade and 
Environment nation, or the world? And whose responsibility is it to respond to environmental 
hazards associated with trade? How international trading community is 
responding to this issue? These are some of the questions this unit will try to 
address.  
Many emerging and developing economies often consciously adopt the export -
led growth strategy in their quest for economic prosperity. A number of countries 
over the last two decades have achieved their economic growth by responding to 
the high external demand for merchandise products as well as knowledg e-based 
services or through foreign d irect investment (FDI) inflows. International trade 
and investment are the channels through which environmental policies transmit 
from one country or region to another.  Although international trade is expected 
to harmonize environmental policies across co untries in the long run, the growth 
process in a country may trigger sustainability challenges through various 
channels. The sustainability challenges may originate in various manners, namely 
- concentration of environmentally damaging industries (e.g., sh ip-breaking, 
toxic chemical processing), overexploitation of natural resources (e.g., surge in 
ﬁshing, forestry, and mining activities), emission of greenhouse gases (GHGs) 
etc. 
Linkages between international trade and environment are bidirectional. On one  
hand, stringent domestic environmental policies / regulations are often criticized 
for creating distortions in international trade patterns owing to the associated cost 
of compliance escalation and the consequent adverse implications on 
competitiveness. On the other hand, international trade and export liberalization 
policies may influence environmental sustainability through three different but 
integrated pathways, namely scale effect  (attributed to accelerating economic 
growth), composition effect  (attributed to structural changes in production / 
economy) and technique effect  (attributed to technological progress). However, 
trade liberalization may not be necessarily detrimental for environment.1 
17.2  TRADE AND ENVIRONMENT: LINKAGES 
First, in line with the predictions of the Environmental Kuznets Curve hypothesis 
(EKCH), the growing income level of a country can significantly influence its 
environmental sustainability. Given the availability of natural resources and 
labour cost advant age, foreign investment in the ‘South’ often extends the 
frontier of production and exportable surplus and brings in other concern areas. 
The shift in economic activities from agriculture (primary sector) to 
manufacturing (industrial activities) leads to l arge scale exploitation of both 
renewable (e.g., water, land, air, forest) and non -renewable (e.g., minerals, fossil 
fuels) natural resources, resulting in their large -scale depletion and / or 
 
1 For comprehensive of literature reviews on environmental impacts of international trade, see 
Jayadevappa and Chhatre (2000), Jeppesen et al. (1998), Thompson and Strohm (1996). 


--- Page 24 ---
 
 
 
130 
Trade, Growth  
and Development degradation, if adequate pollution abatement measures are not t aken. The 
development experience of several developing countries and LDCs in Asia 
indicates that the industrialization drive, if not accompanied by environmental 
governance, often lead to sustainability challenges. Second, the Pollution Haven 
Hypothesis (P HH) deals with environmental degradation scenario originating 
from FDI inﬂows towards the pollution -intensive sectors / regions . Third, the 
Factor Endowment Hypothesis (FEH) argues that a country will specialize in the 
most abundantly available resource an d accordingly lead to sustainability 
challenges. For instance, a relatively capital -abundant country may specialize in 
dirty capital -intensive industries, in presence of trade. However, the PHH and 
FEH work in opposite directions, as specialization pattern s for rich (capital -
abundant) and poor (labour -abundant) countries differs accordingly. Finally, 
over-reliance on a natural resource may lead to policy myopia and compromise 
the broad-based growth path, resulting in the Natural Resource Curse Hypothesis 
(NRCH) phenomenon. While the existence of NRCH in itself may not 
necessarily involve environmental challenges, specialization in ‘brown’ 
activities, particularly in mining or quarrying industries, may lead to serious 
concerns. These effects, either in isolation or cumulatively, often lead to not only 
local (e.g., release of chemical effluents) environmental problems but also trans -
boundary (either regional or global) concerns (e.g., climate change concerns). 
The nature of public goods of environmental problems results in market failure. It 
demands government interventions to set the property rights correctly and / or 
adopt economic policies to internalize the environmental costs. 2 However, inter-
jurisdiction competitions to attract investment and industries, by providing 
economic incentives in addition to weak environmental rules and regulations and/ 
or lenient enforcement of the rules, often result in ‘race to the bottom’ 
competition. In other words, the lax national environmental standard in a country 
might function as an implicit subsidy to the local players (vis -à-vis foreign 
players from a country characterized by stringent environmental standards) in the 
sense that the marginal cost of abatement would remain below the marginal 
damage from pollution . Howev er, if the export partners of a country enhance 
their demand for quality (e.g., through adoption of ISO 14001 standards), such 
trade linkages may then nullify the ‘race to the bottom’ forces. It has been argued 
that adoption of a strong environmental stand ard may be an optimal policy for 
governments, where the marginal cost of abatement would exceed the marginal 
environmental damage . Apart from indirect environment policy -led incentives, 
 
2 Non-inclusion of environmental costs in private marginal cost often results in shifting of 
environmental incidence (impacts / problems) to a large section of the society as they have to 
bear the costs in terms of adoption of environmental averting practices (e.g., water purifier, 
air purifier) and / or costs of morbidity and mortality due to environmental pollution. 
Therefore, the centralised private costs (the cost of pollution abatement) are shifted to public 
at large who may not get any benefits from the economic activity that generates pollution.    


--- Page 25 ---
 
 
 
131 
Trade and 
Environment tax incentives-cum-subsidies are often used to attract investments whi ch are not 
always conducive for sustainability scenario.  
Since the basic trade theory does not consider environmental externalities 
associated with the production and/ or consumption of goods, following Harris 
and Roach (2017) a graphical approach of trad e and environment is presented 
below to familiarize underlying basic concepts of trade with environmental 
externalities.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17.1 Gains and Losses from Importing Automobiles 
In the absence of international trade, domestic supply and demand will be in 
equilibrium at 'a' and corresponding equilibrium output will be Q* and domestic 
price will be P*. If there are no barriers to trade, automobiles can be imported at 
the world price P w. Domestic production will fall to Q 1, as domestic automobile 
manufacturers will lose market share due to availability of cheaper imported 
automobiles. Domestic consumption will increase to Q 2, as more consumers will 
find affordable to purchase imported automobiles. The quantity of import will be 
Q2-Q1.           
The domestic automobile manufacturers will lose an area P*abPw as they sell 
fewer units and that also in lower price. Domestic manufacturers will also incur 
loss of output equivalent to Q* -Q1. Domestic consumers will gain an area of 
P*acPw as price of automobiles fall and purchase more units. The net gain from 
trade will be area abc.    
 
 
           
S’ 
 
Q2 
 
Quantity of Timber 
 
Price 
 
Pw 
 
S 
 
c 
 
d 
 
g 
 
a 
 
b 
 
e 
 
f 
 
P* 
 
Q1 
 
Q* 
 
Private Costs of 
Supply 
 
Social Costs: Private + External 
 


--- Page 26 ---
 
 
 
132 
Trade, Growth  
and Development  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17.2: Environmental Impacts of Importing Automobiles 
17.2.1  Trade and Externalities 
1However, this trade is not free from environmental externalities. There are two 
types of externalities may arise due to such trade - a) production externalities 
caused by production of / manufacturing of automobiles and b) consumption of 
externalities associated with usage of automobiles. Therefore, the gain from trade 
reduces if we include such externalities. Manufacturers do not include the 
environmental costs of production in their private cost function as a result they 
pass on the costs to the society in terms of air and water pollution and dumping 
of industrial wastes on land and water bodies. If one includes the costs associated 
with pollution abatement and resource recovery, costs of production will increase 
and the new supply curve is shown as S' in Figure 17.2. Similarly, consumers do 
not take into consideration the environmental externalities associated with usage 
of the automobile as a result it causes air pollution. If consumers are not charged 
for the production of externalities (exhaust emission), they pass on the costs to 
the society in terms of air pollution and related costs of morbidity and mortality. 
Therefore, benefit that accrues to consumers is re duced, as they need to incur 
costs to avoid exposure from pollution and/ or investing in pollution control 
devices (e.g., catalytic converter). Therefore, the new demand curve shifts 
downward at D'.            
The resulting welfare impacts from trade would  be area abde and afgc in Figure 
17.2, where reduction in domestic production will result in saving in 
environmental costs (or environmental space) of area abde. In other words, the 
country will shift these costs to exporting country(ies) by importing cars . By 
importing more automobiles, the country will incur additional environmental 
costs of the area afgc in terms of air pollution. Since, relative size of the areas 
(abde and afgc) may vary depending on the environmental impacts. Therefore, it 
would be difficult to draw conclusions unequivocally whether trade will result in 
net gain or loss for a country. Moreover, it will depend on goods/commodities 
S
’ 
D’ 
 
Q2 
 
Q1 
 
Q* 
 
g 
 
Quantity of Automobiles 
 
Pric
e 
Pw 
 
S 
 
c 
 
d 
 
b 
 
f 
 
P* 
 
D Domestic 
  Demand 
 
Private Costs of 
Supply 
 
e 
 
 a 
 
Social Costs: Private + 
External 
 


--- Page 27 ---
 
 
 
133 
Trade and 
Environment involved in trade. Importing those goods whose manufacturing is detrimental for 
environment and there is no consumption related environmental impacts will 
benefit importing countries. On the other hand, importing goods whose 
consumption leads to environmental impacts and there is no production related 
environmental implication will benefit exporting countries.     
To clarify consumption and production related environmental externalities and 
their impacts on international trade, we describe them individually below. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17.3: Production Externalities and International Trade 
Exports of natural resources like timber and minerals result in environmental 
costs associated with development (extraction) of natural resources. Higher price 
of such natural resources in international market may lead to over -exploitation 
and therefore may cause large scale deforestation and rapid drawing down of 
mineral resources. There fore, social costs of such natural resources are higher 
than private costs. Since domestic consumers have to pay higher price (P w), they 
will lose consumer surplus by the area PwcbP* and producers of such natural 
resources will gain by the area PwfaP*. The additional gains of the producers are 
supported by higher price (P w) as well as additional production of natural 
resources (Q2-Q*). Additional social cost associate with such export will be the 
area equivalent to adef. There may have some social costs (ex ternalities) 
associated with consumption (processing) of such natural resources in the 
importing countries, however for simplicity we have not considered them here. 
The gain from the trade - equivalent to the area abcf will be weighed against 
additional social cost of the export - equivalent to the area adef. Therefore, the 
ultimate gain or loss from the trade will depend on relative size of the areas abcf 
and adef. This example is also applicable for exports of all commodities where 
environmental externalities arise in the production (e.g., manufacturing textiles, 
leather, and metals).       
         
S’ 
 
Q2 
 
Quantity of Timber 
 
Pric
e 
Pw 
 
S 
 
c 
 
d 
 
g 
 
a 
 
b 
 
e 
 
f 
 
P* 
 
Q1 
 
Q* 
 
D Domestic 
Demand 
 
Private Costs of 
Supply 
 
Social Costs: Private + External 
 


--- Page 28 ---
 
 
 
134 
Trade, Growth  
and Development  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17.4: Consumption Externalities and International Trade 
Import of hazardous wastes (say electronic waste) for processing and disposal is 
an example where severe environmental externalities are associated with demand 
or consumption. In the absence of  international market for e -waste, domestic 
recyclers will pay a price P* to procure the waste from domestic suppliers (say 
aggregators / waste handlers) and recycle up to Q*(Figure 17.4). If international 
e-waste is available at a price of P w (< P*), dome stic recyclers will import e -
waste and process up to Q 2 (> Q*). The gains of domestic recyclers will be the 
area adPwP*, where domestic aggregators will lose by the area bPwP*c. 
However, recycling of such wastes is associated with substantial environmental  
externalities as well as health costs to recyclers (due to exposure to heavy metals 
and poisonous gases). Therefore, the benefits from recycling are lower and costs 
associated with the externalities will be the area equivalent to adef. Therefore, 
ultimate benefits or loss associated with such type of e -waste trade will depend 
on relative size of the areas adbc and adef. However, it is to be kept in mind that 
unless government intervenes and impose an environmental tax/ fee on such 
recyclers, they will succ eed to retain the benefits of additional recycling of 
wastes and pass on the costs to the society in terms of environmental and public 
health impacts.  
Check Your Progress 1 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Explain the relationship or linkages between International Trade and 
Environment. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
Q2 
 
Quantity of Fertiliser 
 
Pric
e 
Pw 
 
S 
 
c 
 
 d 
 
a 
 
b 
 
f 
 
P* 
 
Q1 
 
Q* 
 
D Domestic 
  Demand 
 
Domestic 
Supply 
 
D’ 
 
e 
 
