--- Page 11 ---
 
 
 
117 
Debate on the Trade 
and Growth Nexus Moreover, trade specialisation leads to extensive use of existing factor inputs that 
help resources to move towards the frontier of Production Possibility Curve 
(PPC). This is the well -known phenomena of trade serving a s a vent for surplus 
proposition advanced by H. Myint in 1959 .The expansion of primary export may 
entice the inflow of foreign capital, which is relatively scarce in less -income 
economies that foster the recipient industry and the development of other 
industries. This linkage effect  is significant in export -oriented industrialisation 
strategy as development creates incentive for rest of the industries to expand and 
build over time. This can also expand the provision of physical infrastructure 
such as roads, railways, harbours, telecommunications, electricity, and the like. It 
is argued that the primary-export-led growth strategy has been instrumental in the 
growth process achieved by several industrialised countries such as the United 
States of America, Canada, and Australia. 
16.4.1  Criticism of Primary-Export-Led Growth Policies 
The focus of export -led growth through specialisation in primary commodities 
has received considerable scrutiny and criticism from economists and 
government leaders. Some of the major concerns are the following.  
Firstly, the market growth of primary expor t products is relatively lower in the 
industrialised countries. Based on the Engel’s law , we know that as income 
increases, the demand for primary products falls relative to manufactured 
products.6 Since the developed world are the major importers there i s hardly a 
proportionate increase in the demand for primary products, which corresponds to 
a declining share of industrialising countries imports in the long run. 
Secondly, it is argued that in the long run, the price of primary -exported 
commodities relati ve to manufactured -goods import will tend to fall and, as a 
result, the exporters will face a secular deterioration in their terms of trade 7. The 
prices of primary products fall because of the sluggish demand in the 
industrialised countries and over suppl y of these products from the severe export 
expansion policies in the underdeveloped countries. Under these circumstances, 
the unfavourable terms of trade will reduce the positive gains from trade.  
 
 
6 Economic theory asserts that as the level of income increases, consumers spend a smaller 
amount of their overall income on primary commodities such as foodstuffs and other raw material 
based goods like textiles and apparel. Instead, their spending choices shift towards more 
manufactured goods. Consequently, the demand for primary products declines in relation to the 
demand for manufactured goods.  
7 This thesis is proposed by (a) Singer H, W. (1950). The Distribution of Trade between Investing 
and Borrowing Countries. American Economic Review, 56, 5658. and (b) Raul Prebisch(1950), 
The Economic Development of Latin America and Its Principal Problems, United Nations. 


--- Page 12 ---
 
 
 
118 
Trade, Growth  
and Development 16.4.2  Import Substitution Industrialisation Strategy 
On several grounds, most developing countries ignored the primary -export-led 
growth strategy policy and favoured the import substitution i ndustrialisation 
(ISI)strategies. The focus of import -substitution policies is to augment rapid 
industrialisation through erecting heavy protective tariff and non -tariff barriers to 
incentivise domestic production. The idea is to provide a necessary protective 
environment for the domestic industry to build manufacturing capability to learn 
and improve technical efficiency, productivity and create its own form of 
development.8In essence, the import substitution represents the production of 
goods at home which were earlier being imported. The basic idea is rooted in the 
concept of infant-industry argument of protection for selected (or targeted) 
industries. This is based on the belief that the government can correctly identify 
the potential and emerging industrialising sectors suited for local 
industrialisation. Government supports the indigenous production through high 
trade barriers on similar products, which will encourage dom estic investment in 
local production activities. As the industry matures, the level of protection is 
lowered and the sector will be able to serve the domestic and export market at 
competitive prices. However, in practice, the trade barriers, once erected, are 
difficult to repeal and don’t come down easily. Another important consideration 
for adopting the ISI strategy was the 'Balance of Payment (BoP) difficulties' of 
several economies during the aftermath of World War II, as saving foreign 
exchange seemed t o be more feasible than earning foreign exchange through 
export promotion.  
The incidence of import substitution is often measured by a change in the ratio of 
imports to the total availability (i.e., import plus domestic output) of a single 
product or cate gory of products.  When this ratio falls over time, the particular 
product or sector is subject to be experiencing import substitution. As the 
domestic production replaces imports, the economy is expected to become more 
independent, resilient, diversified and welfare enhancing. In practice, most LDCs 
initiated ISI by using foreign exchange earnings to import capital goods such as 
machines and tools that make consumer or intermediate goods and raw materials 
to manufacture inputs to produce domestically the co nsumer goods previously 
imported. Since the terms of trade of primary export products were unfavourable, 
the main constraint of industrial growth and development was the availability of 
foreign exchange. As industrialisation requires machinery and tools, t he major 
role of import substitution was to reduce the need for foreign exchange used to 
buy goods that could be made at home.  
Import substitution generally goes through different stages. In the first stage, the 
government provides incentive to establish and develop final consumer goods 
 
8 Bruton, H. (1989). Import substitution. Handbook of Development Economics, Vol 2, 1601-
1644. 


--- Page 13 ---
 
 
 
119 
Debate on the Trade 
and Growth Nexus sectors such as food, clothing, electrical appliance, textiles, and leather to use the 
domestic production of consumer goods to replace imported goods. This is 
relatively an easy stage since the large proportion of commodit ies produced 
during this period is the consumer non -durables where comparative advantage 
serves as the driving force. In the second stage, ISI moves from consumer goods 
to developing capital and intermediate goods production such as machine tools, 
petroleum processing, iron and steel, and other capital -intensive industries. This 
stage is generally difficult, as the capital -intensive sectors also require advanced 
technology, sophisticated machinery and the availability of favourable 
infrastructure overheads. In the third and final stage, the production of complex 
industrial goods is envisaged (e.g., chemicals, electronic equipment, tools, etc). 
Once these three stages progress, industry becomes mature and lays the 
foundation for comprehensive industrialisation. 
16.4.2.1 Country Experiences  
The import substitution -based industrialisation originated in the Latin American 
region such as Brazil, Argentina, Mexico, etc., as a reaction against the 
widespread problems associated with primary export -oriented policies. Although 
Latin American countries were successful exporters of agricultural commodities 
(tropical fruits, coffee, cotton and grains) and minerals (petroleum, copper and 
tin) until the middle of the 20 th century, these export sectors were largely 
controlled by foreign companies. These sectors served as foreign enclaves and 
had limited economic linkages with the rest of the sectors creating large income 
inequalities. The post -war scenario and the long -run tendency of the prices of 
primary commodities to fal l relative to the finished manufacturing goods, as 
predicted by the Prebisch -Singer thesis, led the formation of an alternative 
economic strategy for development. As the chief advisor and head of the United 
Nations’ Economic Commission on Latin America (EC LA), economist Prebisch 
argued for the case of shifting away from the dependence on raw material exports 
to the production of manufacture goods that substitute imports, i.e., import 
substitution industrialisation. Soon these policy prescriptions became the  
dominant paradigm followed enthusiastically by the newly independent countries 
in the 1950s and 1960s including India, China and other East Asian economies. 
In the earlier stages, the industrial sectors witnessed considerable economic 
growth and trade exp anded rapidly. However, as countries began to shift from 
different stages of import substation, several issues and unintended consequences 
emerged. Some of the leading issues and problems are discussed in the following 
sub-section. 
16.4.2.2 Criticism of ISI 
In retrospect, the development strategy based on import substitution 
industrialisation generated substantial economic costs including resource 
inefficiencies and wastages. Some of the major criticism are the following: (1) 
Persistent trade barriers and i ndustry protection (2) the resource misallocation by 


--- Page 14 ---
 
 
 
120 
Trade, Growth  
and Development the government as it had commanding control over production decisions (3) 
severe misalignment and mismanagement of foreign exchange rate policies that 
made exchange rate often overvalued (4) worsening of  income inequalities (5) 
encouraged widespread rent-seeking activities.  
Under the inward oriented policy, firms were usually given temporary protection 
to build and develop their production capabilities. However, in practice, the 
barriers rarely come down . Since the level of trade/industry protection has a 
positive link with company profits, it is the interest of the latter to pursue and 
demand larger protection from domestic and international competition. As a 
result, the trade barriers tend to grow over time, leading to considerable welfare 
loss to the society.  
One of the main effects of ISI is the overestimate of the government official’s 
ability to identify market failures and solutions. Since the bureaucracy and 
political considerations made the resou rce allocation decisions, it also generated 
lobbying, accumulation of special provisions, favours and economic 
inefficiencies that build up over time. The result of heavy misallocation of scarce 
economic resources was magnified by the huge inequality in we alth and income 
throughout Latin America.  
A serious issue of government controlled industrial strategy was the development 
and persistence of overvalued exchange rates, resulting from either deliberate 
policy choices or chronic problem by following a fixe d exchange rate regime 
under inflationary pressure. The exchange rates were often overvalued to make it 
easier for the targeted industrial segment to import necessary capital goods and 
raw materials. However, on the other side, it retarded export competiti veness by 
raising the foreign price of domestic goods, which negatively affected the 
agricultural and traditional export sectors. As a result, the investments were 
misallocated, causing productivity and income in rural areas to remain either low 
or stagnant.  
The exchange rate misalignment often hurt domestic manufacture that produce 
imperfect substitutes for imports as it was less profitable to export. Since 
machinery and tools become artificially cheap and easily procured from abroad, 
the domestic product ion tended to be relatively more capital intensive and 
insufficiently labour intensive. As a result, the manufacturing sector did not 
create or absorb surplus labour from agriculture and allied activities. As 
developed regions tend to attract more investme nts and infrastructure facilities, 
there tend to be severe economic imbalances in the contribution of subsistence 
farmers and industrialised class in the national income. This accentuates 
economic inequalities.   
The concentration of economic power in a fe w big industrial sectors in the 
absence of foreign and domestic competition favoured the creation of a large 
number of domestic monopolies. As a result, the manufacturing activities were 
largely internationally uncompetitive, inefficient and inward oriente d (i.e., 


--- Page 15 ---
 
 
 
121 
Debate on the Trade 
and Growth Nexus catered only to the domestic demand). The small size of the domestic market 
hardly provided an incentive for firms to invest in new machinery and equipment 
or have benefits from market-induced scale economies.  
Another major issue associated with the ISI was generating economic waste from 
rent-seeking activities. Since protection from foreign competition was the norm 
and domestic manufactures required import licensing and subsidised credit, the 
system created favourable incentive environment for pr ivate parties to form 
pressure group and lobby the government machinery. In effect, in the absence of 
a strong and transparent institutions and the pervasiveness of bribe and 
corruptions, the system laid ground from large -scale rent-seeking activities that  
diverted scarce economic resources towards unproductive activities. 
16.4.3  Outward Oriented Development Strategies 
In contrast to the heavy focus on internal demand -induced development model of 
ISI, some of the developing economies adopted Outward Oriented Development 
Strategies that favoured dependence on external demand opportunities. Under 
these policies, the govern ment actively targeted manufacturing sectors where the 
country has potential comparative advantage. For instance, if a country was well 
endowed with low -or semi-skilled labour, the government would encourage the 
development of labour -intensive manufacturin g such as textiles, paper, wood, 
etc., in the anticipation of better export prospects.  
Under the outward looking strategy, more trade openness and less market 
restrictions are advocated so that internal domestic prices will be in parity to  
world prices. The policy also keeps an undervalued exchange rate to maintain 
export competitiveness and maintain relatively minimal government interference 
on factor market that helps wages and rents reflect true scarcity. The outward 
oriented policies enc ourage domestic manufacturers to use their relatively 
abundant resources and sell products abroad to achieve economies of scale. Since 
the success of selling products requires skill and effort to face international 
competitiveness, this will act as a driver to raise productivity and product quality. 
The export earning can be used to pay for rising imports and free the economy 
from binding foreign exchange constraints.   
Thus, broadly, the outward oriented industrialisation policies provide similar 
incentives for manufacturing firms to sell either in the domestic or foreign 
market. However, an outward oriented policy itself is not enough to produce 
better growth rates as it must be supplemented by a set of policies that reduce 
distortions, nurture high rates of capital investments, transparent and clear 
property rights, rules and business regulations and an efficient infrastructure in 
the form of ports, airports, electricity and communications.  
16.4.3.1 Country Experiences  
Since the 1960s and 1970s, several developing countries shifted their emphasis 
toward new exports of less -skilled-labour-intensive manufactured goods to the 


--- Page 16 ---
 
 
 
122 
Trade, Growth  
and Development industrialised countries. Remarkably, the shift in industrial policy that promoted 
exports was followed by significant growth resurgen ce in several economies, 
especially in the East-Asian Countries. This High-Performance Asian Economies 
(HPAE), a term coined by the World Bank, are Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, 
Malaysia, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan and Thailand. Among them, Japan's 
economy switched from ISI to export promotion in the late 1950s and early 
1960s. The four Tigers (Hong Kong, South Korea, Singapore and Taiwan) 
initiated the transition in the late 1960s and the Newly Industrialising Economies 
(NIE -Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand) began in the early 1980s. Subsequently, 
during 1965-2000, the HPAE doubled their share of total world exports and total 
world manufactured exports.  
By historical standards, the growth performance achieved by NIE following 
changes in policy orientat ion toward manufactures, especially relaxing import 
restriction and boosting export orientation, has been phenomenal. Among the 
NIE, the initial shift from ISI was made by Taiwan who encouraged export 
promotion policies and subsequently achieved the GDP gr owth rates of about 10 
per cent per year. South Korea shifted towards outward -oriented policies by 
increasing export incentives and lowering import barriers in the 1960s. Since 
then the economy's growth rate increased to about 10 per cent per year. Similar  
growth experience was observed in the case of Hong Kong and Singapore who 
also used export boosting policies. According to the World Development Report 
of 1994 by the World Bank, during 1980 -1992, the average growth rate of real 
GDP per person for strongl y outward oriented economies (Hong Kong, South 
Korea and Singapore) and strongly inward oriented economies (Argentina, 
Bangladesh, Chile, India and Turkey) were 6.2 percent and -0.4 per cent per 
annum, respectively. This reflects the sharp contrast of deve lopment experience 
of countries following completely diverse policy strategies.  
16.4.3.2 Critical Evaluation 
The remarkable, consistent and robust growth of over 10 percent per annum 
across NIE since 1960s has been subject of considerable debate and acade mic 
research. Economists generally agree on several facts about the miracle success 
story of East Asian countries. First, these economies were subject to considerable 
stability in their macroeconomic indicators. Second, the government actively 
encouraged a favourable distribution of income growth, in part through enhanced 
access to healthcare, education, and housing. Investments in social overheads 
developed a highly skilled and literate labour force that improved technology and 
export competitiveness and a ttracted large -scale multi -national investments. 
Third, NIE promoted trade and not just exports, as the case with the mercantilists. 
Exports provided necessary foreign exchange earnings and reduced external 
currency constraints, while imports provided access to new technology inputs and 
products that encouraged productivity. Fourth, the growth in HPAE was 
accompanied by falling income inequality. Though historically most East Asian 


--- Page 17 ---
 
 
 
123 
Debate on the Trade 
and Growth Nexus countries have low level of unequal distribution of wealth, the subsequent p olicy 
initiatives had highly visible wealth -sharing mechanisms. These included land 
reforms, free public education, free basic healthcare, and considerable 
investments in rural infrastructure such as clean water systems, transportation and 
communication systems.  
The improvement in economic equality is associated with rapid rates of 
accumulation physical capital (investment) and human capital (education and 
skill). The large investments were the result of considerably higher levels of 
saving rates that prev ailed in most HPAE that was the result of rapid rate of 
income growth and stable macroeconomic environment of low inflation. The 
human capital investment was facilitated by an active education policy that 
created a pool of highly skilled workforce capable of managing increasingly 
sophisticated forms of manufacturing production. In effect, the technical skill 
endowment enabled most manufacturing industry to shift their level of 
comparative advantage (dynamic gains) so that new investments were made in 
new product and process lines. This supported their active promotion of export -
oriented industrialisation policies.  
A major learning experience of NIE success story is that apparently these 
economies did not follow a stringent import restrictive policy. In fact, they 
actively encouraged the import of essential inputs such as machinery and 
equipment that embodied latest technology and knowledge. The adaptation of 
capital goods in the domestic production boosted technological capability and 
exports competitive ness. This was consistent with the prediction of modern 
theoretical trade and economic growth models showing that protectionism often 
hurt manufacturing exports as the lack of demand for foreign goods forces 
currency to appreciate. This was in sharp contra st to the experience of Latin 
America where low export volumes accompanied heavy restriction on imports 
during the 1980s. 
16.5 INDIAN EXPERIENCE 
In this section, we provide a brief overview of the development experience of 
India since the beginning of economic planning. The focus is on the discussion of 
trade policy regime on industrialisation and growth.  
16.5.1 Experiences with the Inward-Oriented Industrialisation 
Regime 
Soon after independence, India adopted an inward -oriented policy regime. The 
basic p remise was self -sufficiency, minimal external dependence and 
commanding heights of the public sector in the allocation of economic resources. 
The main policy agenda was the reservation of large segment of industries under 
the government ownership and the r equirement of government permission before 
setting up industrial units by private firms. As such, the government heavily 


--- Page 18 ---
 
 
 
124 
Trade, Growth  
and Development protected the domestic industry by insulating them from international 
competition. This was accompanied by multiple controls over inves tments, scale 
of operations, investment location and technology to be used in production.  
The trade regime was highly protectionist and regulated through tariff and 
pervasive non -tariff barriers on imports. Most of the imports were subject to 
discretionary import licensing such as Open General Licensing (OGL), negative 
list and canalisation by the government. On the other hand, to remove the bias 
from overvalued exchange rates, the government introduced several export 
promotion policies and instruments such as broad banding, export scrips, etc. 
However, the distortive incentive structure severel y restricted Indian products to 
be internationally competitive in the world market. The blanket ISI strategy, 
though initially successful in developing a variety of diversified industrial base in 
the country, has often criticised for inefficiencies and poo r rates of growth. For 
instance, since the mid -sixties, the rate of growth of economy was virtually 
stagnated around 3 per cent per annum, which came to be known as the Hindu -
rate of growth. Similarly, the share of trade in GDP remained considerably low 
for many decades.  
16.5.2  Experiences with the Outward Oriented Liberalisation 
Regime  
The cost of blanket protection becomes apparent as the economy gradually 
become prey to the vicious circle of low growth, inefficiency and an 
uncompetitive manufacturing sector. The sluggish export sector further puts 
pressure on foreign exchange that was essential for meeting the essential imports. 
Consequently, government made efforts towards gradual liberalisation of imports 
in the mid-1980s. The severe BOP and fiscal c risis in the late eighties forced the 
government to implement comprehensive liberalisation programs to gradually 
reduce the over dependence on the public sector and the economic inefficiencies. 
The economic reforms, initiated since 1991, began to dismantle  central 
government control in industrial activities by reducing entry barriers, abolishing 
the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices (MRTP) Act, etc. On the external 
sector, considerable reduction of tariff and non -tariff barriers was made across 
raw materials, capital goods, intermediate goods and final goods. A managed 
float replaced the fixed exchange rate regime and foreign investment policies 
were made more market friendly and transparent. All these policy initiatives 
made the Indian economy more  outward oriented with deeper economic 
integration with the rest of the world.  
Since economic liberalisation, the level of trade openness, measured by 
merchandise trade -GDP ratio, has increased substantially from 12 per cent in 


--- Page 19 ---
 
 
 
125 
Debate on the Trade 
and Growth Nexus 1980 to 44 per cent in 2008 9. During 1980 –2013, the organised manufacturing 
sector witnessed a growth rate of 8 per cent per annum with an average share of 
16 per cent in GDP. 10Moreover, since the abysmally poor productivity growth 
rate in the nineties, there is some evidence of co nsiderable surge in productivity 
in the organised manufacturing sector post 2000.Incidentally, the rate of 
economic growth since the 1980s has been remarkable. For instance, based on 
the World Bank data, we find that during the 1980s and 1990s, the GDP ros e to 
5.6 per cent and 5 per cent per annum, respectively. During 2000 -2010 periods, 
the per capita GDP continued to rise at a rate of 7.7 per cent per annum, making 
India one of the fastest emerging economies in the developing world.This indeed 
suggests th at there is evidence of trade led growth in India since reforms. 
However, much empirical evidences are required for asserting whether trade is 
acting as an engine of growth since the onset of comprehensive trade 
liberalisation reforms.  
Check Your Progress 2 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Write a short note on the import substitution industrialisation strategy. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Briefly explain the outward oriented development strategies. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Give a brief account of India’s experiences with the Inward -Oriented 
Industrialisation Regime. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
9 Trade openness is measured by taking the merchandise trade (Export-Import) share in GDP at 
current prices. The data is collected from World Development Indicators (WDI), World Bank 
online database.  
10 The growth rate of manufacturing sector is based on data collected from the Annual Survey of 
Industries (ASI), CSO. The manufacturing share is based on value added share in GDP, collected 
from WDI, World Bank. 


--- Page 20 ---
 
 
 
126 
Trade, Growth  
and Development 16.6  LET US SUM UP 
In this unit, we studied the nexus between trade and economic growth based on 
international trade theory, policy and country level experiences. The impact of 
trade on growth is an active area of research as there are many unsettled answers 
posed by theory as well as country level practices. We know that trade not only 
improves the level of income but also can have significant growth effects through 
the impact on technological progress. However, since the determinant of 
technology is complex and specific to industry and sectors, the underlying link 
between trades induced investments in technology intensive activities such as 
R&D, skill upgradation, knowledge, etc., are not easy to comprehend. However, 
we do have enough evidence to argue that for the welfare b enefits of liberal trade 
to materialise it is necessary to have an efficient, consistent and robust set of 
institutional arrangements governing the economic actors. Unless the rules and 
regulatory environment are properly defined and enforced, the gains fr om trade 
in a highly integrated economy may not be optimal. 
16.7  KEY WORDS 
Rule of 70 According to a simple approximation of time, 
the number of years it takes for an economy 
to double its level is equal to 70 divided by 
the growth rate. This is known as Rule of 70. 
Golden Rule Level of Capital The steady -state level of capital stock that 
maximizes the level of consumption is called 
Golden Rule Level of Capital. 
Import Substitution 
Industrialization (ISI) 
strategies 
The focus of import-substitution policies is to 
augment rapid industrialization through 
erecting heavy protective tariff and non -tariff 
barriers to incentivize domestic production. 
Infant-industry  An infant industry is a new industry, which in 
its early stages experiences relative diffi culty 
or is absolutely incapable in competing with 
established international competitors. 
Open General Licensing 
(OGL)  
An Open General License  (OGL) is a type 
of export license  issued by a government to 
its domestic suppliers.  
Newly Industrializing 
Economies (NIE) 
World Bank defines Indonesia, Malaysia and 
Thailand as Newly Industrializing 
Economies. 
High-Performance Asian 
Economies (HPAE) 
A term coined by the World Bank, HPAE 
considers Hong  Kong, Indonesia, Japan, 
