--- Page 124 ---
123
Physical and Social
Infrastructure
Achievements
Some of the achievements of the government include: Turnaround time at major
ports in India has decreased at a rapid pace from 82.32 hours in FY17 to 59.51
hours in FY19. Five times more growth in major ports’ traffic recoded during
2014-18, compared to 2010-14. Increased efficiency has led three times increase
in net profits of major ports between FY14-18.
5.3.1.4  Aviation
As of 2019, India is the ninth largest aviation market with a passenger throughput
of 344 million. As of 2021, the sector has 91
 in
ternational carriers
 co
mprising of
5 Indian carriers and 86
 fore
ign carriers connecting over 40 countries; and the
sector is contributing US $ 72 billion to GDP. The Ministry of Civil Aviation is
the nodal authority responsible for the formulation of national policies and
programmers for development and regulation of the civil aviation industry in the
country. The growth of airlines traffic in the Indian aviation industry is almost 4
times above the international average. In the year 1991, a total of 10,717,400
passengers were carried in Indian airlines. This number grew multifold to
139,822,450 in 2017. In addition to a robust GDP growth driving increased spends
on air travel, low fares have led to a rise in demand in smaller-towns of India.
India Airlines market despite of being the fastest growing market, has been one
of the toughest aviation markets in the world due to–
- High fuel prices (a sales tax of nearly 30 per cent is levied on jet fuel which
jacks up flight operations for airlines; also, there is an excise duty of 11 per
cent levied on
 je
t fuel sin
ce October 2018);
- Poor and insufficient infrastructure (air traffic is increasing, consequently
space is decreasing to accommodate them);
- Low cost carriers have made the market extremely price sensitive, rigid
regulations, i.e., ample regulations and laws still hold back the industry and
do not provide room for improvement and profits. 
 
Post 
reforms of 1991, aviation sector saw a major reform in its structural and
operational context. The major reforms that redesigned the aviation sector were:
1) Liberalisation: Repealing of the monopolistic Air Corporation Act in 1994
was followed by heavy disinvestment in the two public sector airlines–  Indian
Airlines Corporation and Air India International, leading to the opening up
of the domestic sector to private players, bringing  in more competition and
the resulting benefit of reduced fares.
PPP model: Amidst the constrained fiscal position, the government has given
way to new financing models for the development of airports. Public Private
Partnership (PPP) model i.e. Build Operate and Transfer (BOT), Build Own
Operate and Transfer (BOOT) have been tried for development of Airports
in India. For instance, in November 2018, the Government of India approved
a proposal to manage six AAI airports under public private partnership (PPP)
situated in Ahmedabad, Jaipur, Lucknow, Guwahati, Thiruvananthapuram
and Mangaluru.
2) Open Sky Policy: The Open Sky Policy which allows foreign airlines of
any country or ownership to land at any port on any number of occasions


--- Page 125 ---
124
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview
and with unlimited seat capacity brought in a massive change in the aviation
sector. That is, the Government opened the skies to private players.
3) FDI Policy: Government has put in place an investor friendly policy on FDI
in the aviation sector, under which 100 per cent FDI (Automatic up to 49
per cent and Government route beyond 49 per cent) is permitted in scheduled
Air Transport Service/Domestic Scheduled Passenger Airline, while for NRIs
100 per cent FDI is permitted under the automatic route.
  
Also, foreign
investment in M/s Air India Ltd is brought on a level playing field with
other scheduled airline operators with the amended FDI policy which enables
foreign investment by NRIs into M/s Air India Ltd. up to 100 per cent under
automatic route. According to data released by the Department of Industrial
Policy and Promotion (DIPP), FDI inflows in India’s air transport sector
(including air freight) reached US$ 1,904.37 million between April 2000
and June 2019.
4) Low Cost Carriers (LCC): In 2003 Low  Cost  Carrier  (LCC) entered  the
domestic  aviation  industry which led to substantial fall in the  market
share  of  Legacy  carriers such  as  Air  India, Indian  Airlines  and  Jet
Airways  giving  rise  to fierce  price  wars  between  various  airlines. The
period following  the  introduction  of  the  LCCs  has  been  one  of  rapid
growth  for  the  Indian  airline industry as they enhanced the affordability
of air travel and hence the demand for air travel in India.
5) Greenfield Airports: A greenfield airport denotes a project that lacks
constraints, imposed upon it by prior work or existing infrastructure. In
2007, the Indian government finalised the policy on greenfield airports.
According to the new policy, state governments wanting to set up a greenfield
airport could either do so themselves or through any designated entity or a
joint venture company. For instance, the Government of Andhra Pradesh is
to develop Greenfield airports in six cities under the PPP model.
5.3.2 Telecommunications
India is currently the world’s second largest telecommunications market with a
subscriber base of 1.19 billion and has registered strong growth in the past decade
and half. The  telecommunication  industry  in  India  is  rapidly  growing  and
witnessing  many developments. The sector is becoming more competitive day-
by-day, with the introduction of new players (which in turn has led to sharp and
steady decline of average revenue per user) and has truly revolutionised the way
we communicate and share information The exponential growth is primarily
driven by affordable tariffs, wider availability, roll out of Mobile Number
Portability, expanding 3G and 4G coverage and the onset of 5G technologies,
evolving consumption patterns of subscribers and a conducive regulatory
environment. The industry has undergone a major process of transformation
through several policy reforms and regulations. These include:
1) Liberalisation: With the announcement of the New Economic Policy in July
1991, the telecom sector was declared open to the private sector. This initiated
the transformation of the once government owned monopolistic telecom
market to a multi-operator open competitive market.
2) National Telecom Policy of 1994:  In 1994, the government announced the
National Telecom Policy  which  further  stimulated  the  growth  of  the


--- Page 126 ---
125
Physical and Social
Infrastructure
industry  by  provision  of  world  class services at  reasonable rates,
promotion of  exports, stimulation  both domestic and  foreign direct
investments.
3) The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997: Established Telecom
Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) which was necessary to regulate the
private players in the telecom sector.
4) New Telecom Policy of 1999: Laid down a clear road map for future reforms
by opening by all the sectors in telecommunications to private players.
5) National Telecom Policy 2012: Launched to provide secure, reliable,
affordable and high quality converged telecommunication services anytime,
anywhere for an accelerated inclusive socio-economic development.
6) National Digital Communications Policy 2018: Launched to ensure digital
sovereignty. For instance, under it the government aims to provide universal
broadband connectivity at 50 Mbps to every citizen.
7) Technological Innovations: The  growth  of  telecom  industry  has  also
been  fuelled  by  the  launch  of  newer  telecom technologies  like  3G ,  and
Broadband Wireless Access
  
(BWA),  and  emergence  of  cloud  technologies.
Efforts are  continuously  made  to  develop  affordable  technology  for
masses  and  reinvigorate  the maturing urban markets and help in bringing
balanced growth of economy.
8) FDI Policy:  FDI cap in the telecom sector has been increased to 100 per
cent from 74 per cent; out of 100 per cent, 49 per cent will be done through
automatic route and the rest will be done through the approval route. FDI of
up to 100 per cent is permitted for infrastructure providers offering dark
fibre, electronic mail and voice mail. FDI inflows into the telecom sector
during April 2000 – March 2019 totaled to US$ 32.82 billion, according to
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT).
5.3.3 Power
Power is one of the most critical components of infrastructure crucial for the
economic growth and welfare of people. India’s power sector is one of the most
diversified in the world. Sources of power generation range from conventional
sources such as coal, lignite, natural gas, oil, hydro and nuclear power to viable
non-conventional sources such as wind, solar, small hydro and biomass. The
country’s achievements in the power sector in the recent years have been
outstanding. Electricity generation (both from conventional and non-conventional
sources) increased from 808.5 billion units (BU) (in 2009-10) to 1389.1 BU (in
2019-20), a growth of around 72 per cent. As of January 2021 the national electric
grid in India has an installed capacity of 377.261 Giga Watts (GW).
The Government is implementing reforms towards a secure, affordable and
sustainable energy system to power a robust economic growth. Some of the key
policy reforms in the power sector include:
Liberalisation: India’s generation capacity has increased considerably. This
increase is attributed to the delicensing of power generation in 2003, which
enabled unrestricted participation of private sector companies. India now has
