--- Page 43 ---
42
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview 2.4.2 Causes of Rapid Increase in Tertiary Sector
The tertiary, i.e., the non-commodity sector, has been growing at a much faster
rate than the commodity sector. This in essence means that income generated in
the process of circulation grew at a much faster pace than that in the directly
productive process, and thereby resulting in an increase in the share of the non-
commodity sector. This trend can be attributed to a number of factors, among
which the more important are as follows:
i) A very important factor has been the advent of information technology and
the knowledge economy. This has enhanced the growth of the high
productivity segment of the services sector as well as a variety of service
activities involving low productivity activities catering to a large mass of
people.
ii) A large part of the service sector consists of infrastructure such as banking,
insurance, finance, transport and communication and social and community
services such as educational and medical facilities. An urgent requirement
of development is the proper expansion of infrastructure to cater to the needs
of other sectors of the economy and the expansion of the social and
community services for the well-being of the people.
iii) Public services grow more rapidly where national Governments have
significant role in planning and production in the economy as a whole. In
fact, the ‘visible hands’ of the modern governments as reflected in the
government policies and in the expansion patterns of the national and
international authorities during the last few decades are directed towards
the creation of fast economic and social infrastructures.
iv) Operation of the demonstration effect as a consequence of the growing
mobility due to expanding foreign trade, tourism and cultural and educational
tours is another important factor.
v) Increasing urbanisation may be regarded as another cause of expansion of
the service sector in the economy. In fact, urbanisation is closely associated
with a rise in demands for infrastructure services such as communications,
public utilities and distribution services. A substantial change in the private
consumption pattern of the economy is observed with increasing
urbanisation. Many new goods and services enter into the consumption
basket.
vi) Tourism is becoming more and more international as knowledge is being
spread through television and Internet, and modern technology has made
air transport and hotel accommodations quite comfortable. Tourism in turn
has promoted all types of services.
vii) With the increasing complexities of modern industrial organisation,
manufacturing industries have become service oriented. This
 ha
s been
reflected in the increasing functions of accounting, finance, legal services,
advertisement, marketing, public relations etc. Because of the prevalent
labour
 law
s, these services are being increasingly outsourced, so that growth
in industry is actually being counted as growth in services.


--- Page 44 ---
43
Growth and Structure of
Indian Economy
viii) Another factor, albeit very important, has been the favourable international
environment. The changing liberalised environment opened up immense
possibilities for the exports of India’s service sector. An important
contribution has been made by the IT sector, as also entertainment industry,
etc. India and the ASEAN, the 10-member regional grouping, moved closer
to completing a bilateral trade pact, but finalising a free-trade agreement
(FTA) on services and investment. The pact will enable free movement of
professionals from here such as doctors, engineers, architects and
management consultants across the ASEAN markets.
In addition to the above factors, an increase in the share of the non-commodity
sector in the GDP can also be attributed to slow growth in the commodity
producing sector. While a part of this is explained by difficulties inherent in
bringing about a fast rate of growth in the primary sector, a part is undoubtedly
due to the failure of the secondary sector and its major component, which is
manufacturing and construction, to grow at the much faster rate that was necessary
to give the commodity sector a comparable status with the non-commodity sector
in the growth rate.
2.4.3 Prospects and Opportunities
Both domestic and international factors augur well for the growth of services
sector in India.
A) Domestic Factors. Some of the important factors can be briefly stated as
follows:
i) As real per capita GDP grows, demand for services increases more than
proportionately and this, in turn, reinforces GDP growth itself.
ii) Within the services sector, demand for producer and government services,
which constitute mainly intermediate consumption, have strong multipliers
impacting on real GDP.
iii) The growth of such dynamic service activities, which are intensive users of
communication and
 i
nformation technology, will generate employment
opportunities on a rising scale.
iv) The process of economic growth has itself led to the emergence and
expansion of new services such as advertising, publicity, marketing, etc.
These sub-sectors provide essential service inputs to other sectors in the
economy, thereby developing strong linkages with the rest of the economy.
v) Efficient delivery of services increases the productivity of both labour and
capital in the economy as a whole. In general, services sector appears to be
highly growth-inducing with positive externalities for other services,
 m
aking
services a catalytic agent of growth.
B) International Factors. Some of the recent global developments which provide
opportunities for substantial growth are as follows:
i) The fastest growing segment of services is the rapid expansion of knowledge-
based services, such as, professional and technical services. India has a
tremendous advantage in the supply of such services because of a developed
structure of technological and educational institutions, and lower labour
costs.


--- Page 45 ---
44
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview
ii) Progress in IT is making it increasingly possible to unbundle the production
and consumption of information-intensive service activities. These activities–
research and development, computing, inventory management, quality
control, accounting, personnel administration, secretarial, marketing,
advertising distribution and legal services– are performed in all economic
sectors.
iii) Unlike most other prices, world prices of transport and communication
services have fallen dramatically. The cost of communication is becoming
independent of distance. India’s geographical distance from several important
industrial markets is no longer an important element in the cost-structure of
skill-based activities.
iv) India does not necessarily have to be a low-cost producer of certain types of
goods (e.g., computers or discs) before it can become an efficient supplier
of services embodied in them (e.g., software or music). It is possible now to
provide value added services without waiting to ‘catch up’ in technology
for production of sophisticated equipment or products.
v) The decline in the share of manufacturing in the output of rich countries
implies a relative decline in their demand for industrial raw materials and
fuels. It means that growth in exports of developing countries in the future
will depend less on natural resource endowments and more on efficiency in
providing services and service
-inte
nsive goods.
vi) The aging of population in the developed world implies that the demand for
services will continue to grow.
As a result of the above developments, the sources of comparative advantage of
nations are vastly different now from what they were 50 or even 20 years ago.
And, there are very few developing countries which are as well placed as India
to take advantage of the phenomenal changes that have occurred in production
technologies, international trade, capital movement and deployment of skilled
manpower. It is now possible for India to take advantage of a virtuous circle of
higher growth, higher capital inflows and higher domestic incomes and savings,
which in sum can lead to further growth.
2.4.4 Limitations
However, the service sector, as at present, suffers from low productivity and
quality in spite of fairly large investment in technology. The sector faces multiple
challenges for sustained growth over the years. A number of services where India
enjoys comparative advantages experience lack of clear policy thrust. A number
of services in India are either predominantly associated with the Government or
are not liberalised enough to ensure growth through organised private initiatives.
Services like professional, legal, postal, accountancy and insurance need further
liberalisation to harness their potential. Unless sustained efforts are put in to
improve these, with the increasing importance of the services in wake of structural
adjustment and liberalisation in the economy we may get into two alternate
scenarios.
a) Economic and social position of workers in the service sector will steadily
go down– since real incomes cannot be higher than productivity for any
