--- Page 118 ---
117
Physical and Social
Infrastructure
The issue of pricing of infrastructure services becomes critical here. In this sphere
the long track record of uneconomic pricing and prevalence of subsidies will be
major obstacles.
Demand Orientation of Services: The existing procedure of financing
infrastructure facilities is based on plan allocation and is mainly supply-oriented.
Insufficient stress on the existing infrastructure and the anticipated demand has
resulted in deviations in different counties and consequently a large part of such
investments are not providing sufficient returns. Privatisation will necessitate a
demand-oriented approach.
The challenge for policy is to find appropriate market signals which indicate the
future trend of infrastructure demand and to coordinate the supply of such facilities
in such a manner that investment in infrastructure provides appropriate returns.
Allocation of Risk: Allocation of risk is of key importance in commercialisation
of infrastructure. The risk should be appropriately demarcated and allocated to
different stake-holders. This is important for two reasons:
i) There is a tendency among the private shareholders to shift the risk to the
government.
ii) There is also a tendency among the shareholders to shift the risk on each
other.
Direct Participation by the Government: While the existence of elements of
monopoly in infrastructure will necessitate regulation by the government,
constraints in financing and user charging will render the direct participation by
the government necessary. Therefore, a transparent framework for promotion of
synergistic firmness of public-private partnership in infrastructure is required.
A Suitable Regulatory Framework: Most of the infrastructure projects are right
candidates for developing as a ‘natural monopoly’. These cost per unit scale of
output. But these units cannot be allowed, in the interest of public welfare, to
eschew competition. A healthy guided competition is required for sound growth.
This presupposes the existence of an effective regulatory system.
5.3 PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE: GROWTH
AND POLICY ISSUES
5.3.1 Transport Sector
Transport is an essential economic infrastructure for the rapid development of
any region. The lack of transport facilities retards the process of economic
development even if a region is endowed with rich natural resources. Transport
has been recognised as an indispensable ingredient of a country’s overall
development.
5.3.1.1 Roads
India has the one of largest road network across the world, spanning over a total
of 59 lakh km of road length. This road length
 i
ncludes National Highways (NHs),
Expressways, State Highways (SHs), district roads, PWD roads, and project roads.
In India, road infrastructure is used to transport over 60 per cent of total goods


--- Page 119 ---
118
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview
and 85 per cent of total passenger traffic.  R oad transportation has gradually
increased over the years with the improvement in connectivity between cities,
towns, and villages in the country.
Market size
As of March 01, 2019, the total length of National Highways in India stood at
132,499 km. Huge investments have been made in the sector with total investment
increasing more than three times from Rs. 51,914 crore in 2014-15 to Rs. 158,839
crore in 2018-19. The total national highways length increased to 122,434 kms
in FY18 from 92,851 kms in FY14.
However, the roads sector has been facing several issues including:
i) lack of equity with developers,
ii) higher cost of financing,
iii) shortfall in funds for maintenance,
iv) unavailability of land for the expansion of NHs,
v) significant increase in land acquisition cost,
vi) bottlenecks and checkpoints on NHs which could adversely impact benefits
of GST, and
 
vii)
the value of NPAs in the infrastructure sector (including roads and highways)
has been increasing, with NPAs at around Rs. 2.6 lakh crore as of August
2016.
Issues with financing
As observed by the Standing Committee on Transport (2016), the Ministry of
Road Transport and Highways does not have its own source of revenue other
than budgetary support from the central government, also huge budget allocations
by the central government would be unsustainable in the long-run.
 Hence
, there
is a need to set up Ministry’s own dedicated financial institutions to generate
funds for development of the road sector. 
 
As noted by
 the Standing Committee on Transport (2018), road development
needs concerted efforts in the form of mobilisation of funds from other sources
as private sector involvement has been depleting in recent years.
Targets vs Performance
Achievement of construction targets (for NHs) has ranged between 55 per cent
and 70 per cent during the period 2014-15 to 2019-20. The targets could not be
met due to shortage of funds as noted by the Standing Committee on Transport
(2017). Other reasons for incomplete projects include delays in obtaining
clearances, poor financial and technical performance of the contractors, and law
and order issues.  The Economic Survey 2018-19 also highlighted issues, such
as time and cost overruns, due to delays in project implementation, procedural
delays, and lesser traffic growth than expected, which increased the risk factor
of the projects resulting in stalling of projects.
Project Delays and increase in Project Costs
The Committee on Public Undertakings (2017) had
 noted 
that from 1995, till
June 2016, out of the total 388 projects completed, only 55 projects were


--- Page 120 ---
119
Physical and Social
Infrastructure
completed on or before time.   Delay s in the completion of the projects were
mainly attributed to: (i) the long time taken in land acquisition, and obtaining
environment and forest clearances, (ii) poor performance of concessionaires due
to economic slowdown, (iii) cash flow problems, and (iv) law and order
issues.
 Such delay
s increase project costs, eventually making certain projects
unviable.   
G
overnment Initiatives
Some initiatives undertaken by the government are as follows:
The Government of India has allocated Rs. 111 lakh crore (US$ 13.14 billion)
under the National Infrastructure Pipeline for FY 2019-25. The Roads sector
is expected to account for 18 per cent capital expenditure over FY 2019-25.
Government of India approved the launch of Phase-III of its rural road
programme Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) which
 ai
ms at
consolidation of 1,25,000 kms through Routes and Major Rural Links that
connect habitations to Gramin Agricultural Markets (GrAMs), Higher
Secondary Schools and Hospitals with an estimated cost of Rs. 80,250 crores
for the period 2019-20 to 2024-25.
A total of 65,000 km of roads and highways are to be constructed under
Bharatmala Pariyojana.
100 per cent FDI is allowed under the Automatic route subject to applicable
laws and regulations.
Connectivity in Remote Areas: The Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways also allocates funds towards the development of highways in
areas with poor connectivity. 
 Some
 of these projects include the Special
Accelerated Road Development Programme in North East (SARDP-NE),
Externally Aided Projects and Roads Projects in Left-Wing Extremism
Affected Areas. 
 
In order to accelerate the pace of construction, large number of initiatives
has been taken to revive the stalled projects and expedite completion of
new projects by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. These
include:
i) Streamlining of land acquisition and acquisition of major portion of
land prior to invitation of bids.
ii) Award of projects after adequate project preparation in terms of land
acquisition, clearances, etc.
 
iii)
Close coordination with other Ministries and State Governments
iv) One time fund infusion
v) Regular review at various levels and identification/removal of
bottlenecks in project execution
vi) Proposed exit for Equity Investors
vii) Securitisation of road sector loans
viii)Disputes Resolution mechanism revamped to avoid delays in completion
of projects.
 
