--- Page 55 ---
54
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview UNIT 3 DEMOGRAPHIC TRANSITION AND
ITS IMPLICATIONS
Structure
3.0 Objectives
3.1 Introduction
3.2 The Theory of Demographic Transition
3.3 Demographic Profile of India
3.3.1 Size and Growth Rate of Population in India
3.3.2 Birth Rates and Death Rates
3.3.3 Gender Composition of the Population
3.3.4 Literacy and Gender Composition
3.3.4.1 Gender Selective Abortions in India
3.3.4.2 Government Response
3.3.5 Age Composition
3.3.6 Life Expectancy
3.3.7 Rural-Urban Migration
3.4 Population Growth and Development
3.4.1 Population Policy
3.4.2 National Population Policy, 2000
3.5 Demographic Change and Economic Growth
3.5.1 Age Structure and Economic Growth
3.5.2 Concept of Demographic Dividend
3.5.3 Population Health
3.6 Demographic Dividend and Policy Interventions
3.6.1 Capturing India’s Demographic Dividend
3.7 Let Us Sum Up
3.8 Term-end Exercises
3.9 References
3.10 Key Words
3.11 Answers or Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises
3.0 OBJECTIVES
After reading this unit, you will be able to:
understand the impact of demography on economic growth and comprehend
the concept of demographic dividend in detail;
assess the role of health, education, and employment in harnessing the
demographic window of opportunity;
recognise the constraints that a nation faces in harnessing the benefits of the
demographic dividend;
know the demographic profile of India; and
analyses how the population growth affects economic development.


--- Page 56 ---
55
Demographic Transition and
Its Implications3.1 INTRODUCTION
The relationship between population growth and economic development has been
debated for several decades. The early Malthusian view was the pessimistic
argument stating that population growth impedes economic growth resulting in
reduction in per-capita income and resources which results in deterioration of
quality of life. The optimistic argument emphasises that population growth
promotes economic development as experienced by several East Asian countries.
A young educated population increases productivity and contributes to invention
and innovation of technologies.
An increase in the proportion of working age population (15-59) and fall in the
proportion of dependent population of age groups (0-15) and 60+ gives birth to
a window of opportunity termed as demographic dividend. The working age
population helps in increasing savings, investment and improves the economic
prosperity and standard of living of people. However, the benefits of demographic
dividend are not automatic or guaranteed. It depends upon several factors like
education, health, employment, infrastructure, right economic policies, and good
governance. The potential demographic dividend if not actualised may turn into
demographic disaster where young population becomes a liability or permanent
burden on the economy.
3.2 THE THEORY OF DEMOGRAPHIC
TRANSITION
The process by which fertility rates eventually decline to low and stable levels
has been called demographic transition. Fertility rate is defined as the average
number of children per women in the reproductive age group. Demographic
transition postulates three stage sequences of birth and death rates which are
associated with economic development. It explains phasing out process of
population growth rates starting from virtually stagnant growth stage characterised
by high birth and death rates through a rapid-growth stage with high birth and
low death rates to stable, low growth stage in which both birth and death rates
are low. This demographic transition has been witnessed in contemporary
developed nations as they developed and one can identify the developing nations
as they move through the different stages of this transition. The issue is what
explains this transition or what are the factors that contribute to it.
First Stage of Demographic Transition
In this stage the death rates are high due to absence of effective medical aid,
primitive sanitation, and poor diets. The birth rates are also high on account of
absence of knowledge about family planning techniques, early age of marriage,
illiteracy and deep-rooted social beliefs, and customs about the size of the family
including, as an insurance against high child mortality rates. The actual rate of
growth of population is low since high birth rate is balanced by high death rate.
Second Stage of Demographic Transition
With economic development resulting in high incomes, improvement in public
health facilities there is a marked decline in mortality that raises life expectancy
from under 40 years to 60 years. However, the decline in death rate is not
immediately accompanied by decline in fertility. In this stage of demographic


--- Page 57 ---
56
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview
transition, with declining death rate, birth rate does not fall correspondingly.
This leads to transition from stable or slow growing population to rapidly
increasing population.
Third Stage of Demographic Transition
The forces and influences of modernisation (including increase in female work
participation rate and move towards nuclear families) and economic development
causes fertility rate to decline so that falling birth rate eventually converges with
the death rate leaving little or no population growth. The characteristics of the
third stage are low birth rate, low death rate, small family size and low growth
rate of population.
3.3 DEMOGRAPHIC PROFILE OF INDIA
3.3.1 Size and Growth Rate of Population in India
The study of India’s demography is essential to understand the dynamics of
economic development and economic welfare. Theory of demographic transition
helps to understand and analyse the change in the magnitude of population.
India has around 2.4 per cent of the total land area of the world and approximately
17 per cent of the world population residing in this country. In  2011 the population
of India was 1210 million, making it the second largest in the world. Area-wise,
India is at the seventh position in the world.
India’s Demographic Phases:
A study of growth rate of India’s population can be categorised into four phases
Phase I: 1891-1921(Stagnant Population)
During the first phase of 30 years India’s population grew from 236 million in
1891 to 251 million in 1921. High birth rate was neutralised by high death rate
that ensured that population growth was stable during this period. Population
increased by 15 million only and the compound annual growth rate was just 0.19
per cent per year. India’s first stage of demographic transition was marked by
stagnant population.
Phase II: 1921-1951(Steady Growth)
During the second phase of demographic transition population grew from 251
million in 1921 to 361 million in 1951. The population grew by 110 million with
compound growth rate of 1.22 per cent per year. The death rate during this period
decreased from 47 per thousand to 27 per thousand. The fall in death rate was
mainly due to control of widespread epidemics like plague, smallpox, cholera
etc. that took heavy toll of human lives. From 1921 onwards India entered the
second phase of demographic transition marked by steady but low growth rate
of population.
Phase III: 1951-1981(Rapid Growth)
During the third phase of 30 years India’s population grew from 361 million in
1951 to 683 million in 1981. There was a record growth of population by 322
million with compound annual growth rate of 1.22 per cent per annum. With the
beginning of planning, the extension of hospitals and medical facilities was under-
