--- Page 73 ---
72
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview
a shortage of young population of around 56 million by 2020, India will be only
country with a youth surplus of 47 million. (Report on Education, Skill
Development and Labour Force (2013-14) V olume III, Land Bureau, 2014). India
will not only have a young work force to fulfil its domestic needs but also an
opportunity to become the global hub for skilled work-force. ( Niti Aayog, 2017).
According to Dyson “More than half of the demographic growth during 2001-
2026 will occur in the northern states like Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan
and U.P. The populations of these four states will increase around 45-55 per cent
over this period, but those of other states will grow by only about 20-30 per
cent.” Unleashing the demographic dividend is one of the biggest challenges
that India faces today. Some states like Kerala, Goa, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh,
Punjab, Himachal Pradesh and West Bengal have surpassed average age of 29
years and hence shall be experiencing population ageing soon. States like Bihar,
Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Uttar Pradesh have huge potential demographic
dividend that can be utilised if timely action is taken. Equipping the young
population with health, education, employment opportunities and adequate skills
is of paramount importance.
The demographic window of opportunity has several challenges.
1) Education and Skills
Human resource development plays an important role in unlocking
demographic dividend. Investment in education helps in increasing
productive labour force and empowers them with increased knowledge and
skill. The public expenditure on education has been very low (around 3.6
per cent) as against the goal of 6 per cent. The current contribution is
significantly less if we aim universalisation of elementary education,
universal provision of resources, universal enrolment and retention and
growth in secondary and higher education. Education can act as a powerful
instrument of social change and economic development. The quality of
education needs to be addressed immediately which is possible if we increase
investment in education and allocate resources judiciously.
Education empowers youth with skills and vision that help them contribute
productively in today’s knowledge economy. India dreams of becoming skill
capital in today’s world. For that we need to work on the quality of India’s
primary, secondary and tertiary education. Quality education augments
knowledge, skills and productivity of students who later on get employed
productively in different sectors of the economy. Hence education is the
back-bone of young India’s ability to harness the demographic dividend.
Girl’s education can further serve as an instrument for promoting fertility
decline. Education raises the opportunity cost of having children and hence
working and educated women prefer having less number of children. The
cost of investment per child also goes up as parents invest more in health
and education of each child raising productive capacity of future generation.
States need to adopt specific policy measures in the field of education-
i) Improving access to education considering high dropout rates among
senior students.
ii) Removing gender disparity in the higher age group and in the rural
areas.


--- Page 74 ---
73
Demographic Transition and
Its Implications
iii) Improving quality of education, including pupil-teacher ratios and
provision of amenities in schools, especially in view of the declining
learning levels. (Economic Survey 2014-15).
Southern states had harnessed the benefits of demographic dividend since
they had higher education enrolment and better quality of education and
learning levels. The northern states have huge demographic potential due to
declining fertility rate. They have time to plan and pursue policies in several
areas like education, health, gender issues and employment generation to
garner the benefits of demographic opportunity.
2) Employment
The benefits of demographic bonus with diminishing dependency ratio
cannot be reaped unless the country’s working age population to total
population improves in the face of expansion in employment opportunities.
The benefits of demographic dividend are neither automatic nor guaranteed.
India’s economic growth has not been very employment friendly. The quality
of available employment has fallen as the share of unorganised and casual
work in total employment has risen. Roughly 93 per cent of the workforce
is employed in the informal sector. India’s high rate of informality is a drag
on its economic development and source of economic inequality. Informal
workers lack job security and are vulnerable to shocks such as loss of income
and illness. They earn less, work in unsafe environment and are hence less
productive compared to the formal workers.
India experienced three paradoxes of economic growth (Santosh Mehrotra,
2016)
i) There has been social inclusion but very little inclusive growth. Inclusive
growth can be defined as one where output growth is accompanied by
employment growth. When the growth is inclusive, the benefits of
growth reach the bottom sections of the society. It was found that, despite
high growth rate of national income, most of the increase in the
employment took place in unregistered enterprises in the form of
informal employment.
ii) In the period of sustained rapid economic growth from 2005-10
manufacturing employment declined in the absolute terms and services
employment barely grew at all. Employment increase has been
concentrated in construction sector which absorbed unskilled workers
leaving agriculture, due to slow agricultural growth and chronic rural
distress driven by shrinking farm size.
iii) The female labour force participation rates have been falling, despite
rising per-capita income. Women’s labour force participation rate
dropped from 42.7 per cent in 2004-05 to 31.2 per cent in 2011-12 and
further to 27.4 per cent in 2015-16. The participation rates are lower in
urban areas and among the educated women.
India is at a crucial point of its demographic dividend since window of
opportunity will not last forever. The youth must get productive jobs in
agricultural and non-agricultural sector for the demographic dividend to be
realised.


--- Page 75 ---
74
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview
The realisation of India’s demographic dividend depends upon favourable
demographics and capacity to create productive employment opportunities
for youth. We have the advantage of being youngest nation on the planet but
we still have not skilled our youth sufficiently and created ample job
opportunities. Youth unemployment is one of the biggest challenges that
our nation is facing today. To overcome this challenge we have to adopt
certain policies:
A) Efficient Infrastructure
Economic infrastructure includes reliable roads, railways, telecommunications,
water supply, sanitation, agricultural needs etc. Social infrastructure also
comprises of education and health services that needs to be improved
considerably. Investment in education and training will equip the youth with
different skills and enhance their employability capabilities. Expansion of
primary and secondary schools along with quality up gradation can help in
achieving goal of universalisation of literacy and promote employment
opportunities. Expansion of health services will promote demand for doctors,
paramedical personnel and other diagnostic centre that will enlarge
employment.
Provision of rural infrastructure can be tapped as an important source of
employment generation. Connecting roads in rural areas to urban areas and
four lane highways projects should be encouraged. Prime Minister’s Gram
Sadak Yojana is aimed at connecting all villages with pucca road and is a
labour-intensive project.
B) Information Technology
IT industry has opened employment opportunities for educated youth and
has a great future. Government has a major role in expanding computer
education to rural areas and bottom sections of the society so that the
capabilities of youth are directed towards IT jobs.
C) Small Scale Industries
In the manufacturing sector, small scale industries contribute 86 per cent of
the employment while medium and large scale industries contribute 14 per
cent of the employment. The major problem with SSI units is credit and
upgradation of technology. The government’s initiatives in providing higher
amount of credit through MUDRA schemes would enlarge employment
generation.
D) Reformed Outlook towards Informal Sector
Informal sector employs a large proportion of casual workers and self
employed workers in total labour force. Around 93 per cent of the work-
force is absorbed in the informal or unorganised sector. Hence it is important
to make it easier and accessible for the job seekers to find self-employment
in productive work during the transformation of economic structure into
organised system. All the legal and regulatory hurdles in form of difficulties
in availability of credit and marketing should be addressed by the government
immediately. Encouraging the informal sector by providing the workers
social security and cash transfers would help them to sustain lives and
improve their standard of living.
