--- Page 7 ---
COURSE INTRODUCTION: INDIAN
ECONOMIC POLICY (MEC-205)
The focus of the course on Indian Economic Policy is to discuss the analytical
framework within which the economic policy has evolved over time. It highlights
the consideration that has underpinned the formulation and implementation of
the policies at the macro and at micro (sectoral) levels. Several theoretical concepts
have found an expression in this course. The economic policies conditioned the
environment and in turn were conditioned by the environment. This two-way
relationship has been examined in this course. An integrated approach to different
aspects of policy-making has been adopted.
The course is structured around six blocks. Each block is further sub-divided in
to several units. Each Unit is self-contained and has organic linkages with all
other Units.
Providing an overview of Indian economic development in historical perspective,
Block 1 presents the status of growth and structure of the Indian economy since
independence. The block also discusses the prospects and opportunities of Indian
economy in the context of domestic and international developments. Demographic
profile of India and its implications for demographic dividend and the resource
base of Indian economy both in terms of natural resources and physical and
social infrastructure have also been covered in this block.
Block 2 deals with the development strategies adopted in India. It focuses on the
policy choice exercised between state and market as the principle drivers of
economic activity in different phases of India’s development journey.
Block 3 throws light on two major economic policy instruments i.e., monetary
and fiscal policy. The four units covered in this block focus the decisive role that
has been played by the monetary and fiscal authorities in guiding a growing
economy. It highlights some of the major milestones including measures related
to the FRBM Act, the implementation of goods and services tax (GST,) the
recommendation of 15
th Finance Commission and the new mandate of the
monetary policy on inflation targeting and the institutional context in which that
has to be pursued.
Block 4 on sector specific issues and policies assess growth in all three sectors
of economy i.e., primary, secondary and organised and unorganised services
sector, focusing on issues and concerns of these sectors that need to be addressed
in the respective policy initiatives for those sectors.
Block 5 analyses the External Sector and Trade Policy. It examines the emerging
external sector in India’s economy and issues to be addressed in Trade Policy.
The major issues and challenges encountered in India’s economic policy-making
have been identified and analysed in Block 6 . These issues are: Poverty:
Malnutrition and Inclusive Growth; Employment and Unemployment; Social
Security measures; Regional Disparities and Ingredients of Good Governance.


--- Page 8 ---
Block 1
Indian Economic Development: An Overview


--- Page 9 ---
8
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview BLOCK 1 INDIAN ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT: AN OVERVIEW
This Block presents the evolution of the Indian economy since the Colonial period.
Covered in this block is the status and structure of the Indian economy since
independence which will enable us to know the evolution and analysis of Indian
economic policy in historical context. This block comprises of 5 Units.
Unit 1: Indian Economic Development: A historical perspective provides an
overview of India’s Colonial economy during the British period, the process
resorted by the British rulers to undermine and disrupt the traditional Indian
economy and important milestones of Indian national movement which in turn
will enable an understanding of the evolution of Indian economic policy in post-
independence period.
Unit 2: Growth and structure of the Indian economy  identifies the growth
path of Indian Economy since 1951, the stages of growth through which Indian
Economy has evolved.
Unit 3: Demographic transition and its implications throws light on theory of
demographic transition, demographic profile of India, the issues related to
potential demographic dividend that can be harnessed across Indian states.
Unit 4: Natural Resources provides the status of natural resources i.e. land and
soils, water resources, biodiversity, forest mineral resources etc as availability
of these resources, their utilisation and capacity to mobilise determine the
economy’s ability to overcome the constraints on its development.
Unit 5: Physical and Social infrastructure provides a profile of the availability
of physical and social infrastructure in the country. The policy framework of
public private partnership that has facilitated the growth of transport,
telecommunication energy and social infrastructure has been examined. The
challenges confronting the infrastructure and the way ahead have also been
discussed.
