--- Page 82 ---
81
Demographic Transition and
Its ImplicationsUNIT 4 NATURAL RESOURCES
Structure
4.0 Objectives
4.1 Introduction
4.1.1 Knowledge of Natural Resources
4.2 Land and Soils
4.2.1 Land Utilisation in India
4.2.2 Issue of Land acquisition
4.2.3 Need for a Comprehensive Land-Use Policy
4.2.4 Soils
4.3 Cropping Pattern in India
4.3.1 Crop Diversity
4.3.2 Future Cropping Pattern in India
4.4 Water Resources
4.4.1 Water Issues and Solutions
4.4.2 National Law on Water
4.5 Biodiversity
4.5.1 The Biological Diversity Act, 2002
4.6 Forest Resources
4.6.1 Present Position
4.6.2 National Forest Policy
4.7 Mineral Resources
4.7.1 Features of Minerals
4.7.2 New Mineral Policy, 2008
4.7.3 Acquiring Mineral Sources Abroad
4. 8 Allocation of Natural Resources
4. 9 Environment and Economic Development
4.9.1 Environmental Protection in India
4.9.2 National Environment Policy, 2006 (NEP)
4.10 Let Us Sum Up
4.11 Term-end Exercises
4.12 Key Words
4.13 References
4.14 Answers or Hints to Check your Progress Exercises
4.0 OBJECTIVES
As you go through this Unit, you will begin to appreciate the:
importance of natural resources in the growth process of an emerging
economy like India;
significance of policies to create an eco-system for optimum utilisation of
natural resources;


--- Page 83 ---
82
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview
 the present status of knowledge and availability of different natural resources
in India;
policy framework guiding the use of natural resources in India; and
need for a comprehensive resources-use policy and suggested outline for
such a policy.
4.1 INTRODUCTION
The availability of resources, their utilisation, and the capacity to mobilise
additional resources, determine an economy’s ability to overcome the constraints
on its development. As the world’s resources grow scarce, India faces an uphill
task to secure the resources required for its progress and future. On the demand
side, growth in population and urbanisation is increasing competition for all kinds
of resources. Meanwhile, resource supplies are being constrained by geopolitical
factors and inadequate complementary infrastructure to support resource
exploration and generation at a required pace. As a result of this double-edged
scarcity, concerns are growing over the availability and prices of resources. Yet,
approached imaginatively, the quest for efficiency of resource use can become
an important source of economic growth and job creation.
As in most other Emerging Economies (EEs), a large proportion of population of
India is dependent upon agriculture and other primary activities which consist in
direct exploitation of natural resources. The natural resources of India, as the
following survey indicates, are varied and provide an adequate basis for building
a diversified modern economy.
4.1.1 Knowledge of Natural Resources
Information on stock of natural resources is much better in case of India than in
most EEs. Basic resource survey agencies have been in existence for a century
or more and systematic surveys and investigations of resources have been
undertaken by them.
Work on mapping and surveys of natural resources has expanded greatly under
the Five-Year Plans. Some of the institutional arrangements put in place in this
regard are:
The older agencies, such as the Survey of India and the Geological Survey,
have been expanded to enable them to undertake larger programmes of work,
and new agencies have been created to undertake specialised tasks or surveys
in fields which had not been covered earlier.
The Indian Bureau of Mines was established in 1950 to undertake an
economic assessment of natural resources and to formulate programmes of
development.
The Oil and Natural Gas Commission , established in the late 1950’s to
undertake exploration and development of petroleum resources, has been
responsible for major discoveries of oil and natural gas in Assam, Gujarat
and Bombay High.
The Central Water and Power Commission (now bifurcated into two),
established in 1945, has the responsibility for the coordination of hydrological
investigations and assessment of natural resources.


--- Page 84 ---
83
Natural Resources
A Soil Land Use Survey has been established under the Indian Council of
Agricultural Research; systematic soil surveys are being undertaken by it in
cooperation with the State Departments of Agriculture.
The newly introduced Forest Survey, the State of Forest Report which is
published at regular intervals, etc. are regular source of information and
data for policy-makers.
The national laboratories and institutes of scientific research also undertake
studies relating to evaluation for utilisation of natural resources.
The experience under the Plans has demonstrated the need for further expansion
or acceleration of work in some directions: a greater use of modern survey and
mapping techniques and an adequate economic assessment of natural resources.
Investigations of soil fertility and assessment of groundwater reserves will need
to be improved to provide data for an intensive use of chemical fertilizers and
efficient water management, which are essential for the successful use of the
new high-yielding varieties of seeds or other programmes of intensive cultivation.
Modern survey techniques, such as aerial photography, aero-magnetic survey
and remote-sensing, which have advanced very rapidly in recent years, but which
are not used adequately by the Indian survey agencies will need to be used much
more. The use of these techniques reduces the time requirements of surveys and
preparation of maps; makes it possible to survey inaccessible areas and helps in
the location or estimation of reserves of minerals and other natural resources.
4.2 LAND AND SOILS
India measures 3,214 kms. from north to south and 2,933 kms. from east to west
with a total land area of 32,87,782 sq. kms and a coastline measuring 7516.5
kms., plus 1,197 islands. It is the seventh largest landowner in the world after
Russia, Canada, China, the U.S.A., Brazil and Australia in that order. In brief,
India is a vast country and has a considerable strategic significance on account
of its location, size, and economic resources. Standing at the heart of the Indian
Ocean, the country is in a much better position than any other in the area to
control the Indian Ocean routes, most of which touch the Indian ports. The air
routes between Europe, West Asia, Africa and East Asia, South-East Asia and
Japan also pass through India. It gives India an advantage in terms of international
mobility of persons and commodities.
4.2.1 Land Utilisation in India
The available land, on the basis of its use, can be classified into two parts, viz. ,
(1) Agricultural land, and (2) Non-agricultural land.
A) Agricultural Land
It includes net sown area,current fallows and land under miscellaneous tree crops
and groves. Agricultural land in India totals a little over 50 per cent of the total
geographical area in the country. This is the highest among the large or medium-
sized countries of the world, indicating -
the influence of favourable physical factors such as large area, the extent of
plains and plateaus and a very small extent of arid areas (about 15.8 per cent
of the country’s geographical area is arid.)
the extension of cultivation to a large proportion of the cultivable land.
