--- Page 133 ---
132
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview
services provided, primary health infrastructure in rural areas consists of a three-
tier system.  This includes Sub-Centres (SCs), Primary Health Centres (PHCs),
and Community Health Centres (CHCs). A similar set up is maintained in urban
areas.
Issues concerning the Healthcare sector in India include:
A) Shortfall at different levels of the healthcare delivery system.
  As of 
2018,
there is a shortage of 2,188 CHCs, 6,430 PHCs and 32,900 SCs.
B) Shortfall of doctors. As of 2018, there is a shortfall of 46 per cent of doctors,
and 82 per cent of specialists including surgeons, obstetricians,
gynaecologists, physicians, and paediatricians in Primary Health Centres
across India. Certain reasons identified for the shortage of personnel in
government facilities include: (i) poor working environment, (ii) poor
remuneration making migration to foreign countries and to the private sector
more attractive, and (iii) procedural delays in recruitment and poor forward
planning for timely filling up of positions.
 
C)
Low public health spending in healthcare. The public health expenditure
(sum of central and state spending) has remained between 1.2 per cent to
1.5 per cent GDP between 2008-09 and 2018-19, which is relatively low as
compared to other countries. This has been resulting in high out of pocket
healthcare expenditure. It is estimated that 65 per cent of the health
expenditure is borne by consumers in India
Government Initiatives
Some of the major initiatives taken by the Government of India to promote Indian
healthcare industry are as follows:
Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY): a Central Sector
Scheme, announced in August 2003 to address imbalances in availability of
tertiary care hospitals and improve medical education in the country. It has
two components– Setting up of new AIIMS, and up-gradation of existing
State/Central Government Medical College/Institutions (GMC).
Mission Indradhanush: launched in 2014 to strengthen and re-energise the
programme and achieve full immunisation coverage for all children and
pregnant women at a rapid pace.
Ayushman Bharat Yojana:  a national initiative launched as the part of
National Health Policy 2017, in order to achieve the vision of Universal
Health Coverage (UHC). The Ayushman Bharat comprises of two inter-
related components, (i) Establishment of Health and Wellness Centres, and
(ii) Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PM-JAY)
Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PMJAY): Launched in September 2018
under the Ayushman Bharat programme, PMJAY aims to provide a cover of
Rs. five lakh per family per year to 10.7 crore families (no cap on family
size and age) belonging to poor and vulnerable population for secondary
and Tertiary Healthcare.
The National Medical Commission Act, 2019: A legislation passed by
Parliament to provides for a medical education system which ensures: (i)
availability of adequate and high quality medical professionals, (ii) adoption


--- Page 134 ---
133
Physical and Social
Infrastructure
of the latest medical research by medical professionals, (iii) periodic
assessment of medical institutions, and (iv) an effective grievance redressal
mechanism.
The Government of India is planning to increase public health spending to
2.5 per cent of the country’s GDP by 2025.
Looking Ahead
Healthcare has become an important cornerstone in India’s development plan,
with various initiatives including Ayushman Bharat- Health and Wellness Centers
(HWCs) and Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PM-JAY), Swachh Bharat,
Digital India, Skill India, Start-up India, Make in India etc. In synergy, these
initiatives will comprehensively address the healthcare challenges of India, such
as reducing overall burden of diseases, lowering out-of pocket expenditure,
augmenting healthcare infrastructure and promoting access to quality care.
However, to provide assurance of healthcare for all, the government must
recognise and address the rising concerns and sustainability of the private
healthcare providers, which account for 70 per cent of bed capacity expansion
over the past decade and cater to 60 per cent of inpatient care demands of the
country. As healthcare services and coverage expand, successful implementation
will require a parallel concerted push towards quality assurance, appropriate
governance and regulation, improving referral pathways as well as leveraging
appropriate technologies and innovations at all levels. This will be possible only
with effective collaborations between all the stakeholders, including the private
sector.
5.5 INFRASTRUCTURE: CHALLENGES AND W AY
AHEAD
The Government of India has launched various critical infrastructure projects
like Power for All, Smart Cities Mission, Swachh Bharat mission, and many
more with an objective to build world class infrastructure in the country. However,
as per Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation’s (MoSPI) Flash
report of January 2018, it is observed that around 20 per cent of the central
sector projects are delayed beyond their scheduled date of completion. Managing
these complex projects has always been a challenge, especially since these projects
are long-term, involve multiple stakeholders, bring-in new technologies, and
constrained resources. Most of the infrastructure projects are delayed primarily
due to regulatory approvals, issues on land acquisition, shortage of skilled
resources, ineffective dispute resolution mechanism, and geological challenges.
Some of the major challenges faced in the infrastructure development in the
country are:
Land Acquisition: Land acquisition has been the single largest roadblock for the
development of infrastructure. Several projects have been stalled or delayed due
to land acquisition issues. The causes behind delays in land acquisition includes
resistance from farmers or local communities whose land is being acquired and
lack of well-planned, efficient, and demonstrable rehabilitation packages for
displaced persons.
Delay in regulatory and environmental clearance: There are various categories
of approvals required across the project cycle at every stage, right from the pre-


--- Page 135 ---
134
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview
tendering stage to post-construction causing delays in the process. Clearly, better
governance will be a big help in mitigating long delays in infrastructure projects.
Funding Constraints:  There is increasing reliance on the private sector for
developing and maintaining infrastructure that need funds for projects that are
often capital intensive and have a high gestation period. The private investment
in infrastructure projects is typically in the form of debt raised by developers.
India’s long-term debt market is not deep enough. Equity markets are not
favourable for financing projects either, because of uncertainties involved in
execution and returns. These issues remain unresolved and continue to create
problems in financing infrastructure projects.
Capacity of private players: Infrastructure projects in India are becoming larger
in size and complexity, and such projects require financial patronage and
additional project management skills, which most medium-to-small Indian
companies currently lack.
Way ahead
Land acquisition: Earlier, the government had made cabinet approval mandatory
for leasing, licensing, or transferring land. By relaxing transfer regulations for
land it owns, the government has taken a positive that should resolve the delay
of projects by procedural issues, and complement the guidelines to resolve land
issues.
Fast-track policy and regulatory reforms for efficient implementation: Sponsoring
agencies need to make a concerted effort to develop strong performance
management systems to drive timely execution of projects including defining
performance standards for nodal agencies and creating a transparent and accurate
tracking mechanism as well as performance-linked incentives and penalties.
Dispute Resolution:  To eliminate the issues of delays and litigations, a
Performance Review Unit should be given powers to gather information from
nodal agencies on clearances and incentivise or regulate this.
Facilitate Funding for Infrastructure Projects: In this direction, setting up of
Infrastructure Debt Funds (IDFs) and reduction in ‘withholding tax’ on the interest
paid on these bonds are some other positive measures that are expected to facilitate
the flow of long-term debt into infrastructure projects. Furthermore, introducing
PPP mode by allowing the private sector into some former fully government-
owned infrastructure sectors, such as telecommunications and domestic civil
aviation, has also produced exemplary results. A significant start has been made
in involving the private sector in the provision of transport infrastructure.
Check Your Progress 2
1) Discuss the recent policy initiatives undertaken by Government of India
towards transport infrastructure development in India.
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
