--- Page 34 ---
33
Growth and Structure of
Indian Economy
Phase I: 1950-1980
India’ s GDP increased at an annual average rate of 3.5 per cent. 1 During this
period, population has also increased at an annual average rate of over 2.00 per
cent. Therefore, the real per capita income has increased only at an annual average
rate of 1 per cent. During the first decade, real national income went up by 3.8
per cent (1.8%), this rate came down to 3.5 per cent (1.2%) in the 1960s, and 3.1
per cent (1.1%) in the 1970s. During this phase, the nation followed the Socialist
regime with the objectives of planning being—rapid industrialisation with
emphasis on developing a strong investment goods sector, poverty alleviation,
improving per capita incomes and an even distribution of income. Public sectors
played a central role to the public sector. Import substitution, export subsidies
and stringent restraints on technology and investment cooperation with the rest
of the world— kept India somewhat a closed economy. Substantial controls on
capacity expansion and licensing requirements for manufacturing industries were
also part of the policy strategy.
Phase II: 1980-1990
A reversal of trend occurred during the 1980s: the average annual rate of growth
increased to around 5.5 per cent. The socialist flavour of the Nehruvian policies
was blamed for the worsening of the growth performance of the Indian economy
by the 1970s for these policies are believed to limit the foreign competition and
make domestic firms inefficient and also limit a productivity-enhancing structural
transformation by restricting the possibilities of resource reallocation to more
productive sectors. In contrast, post-1980 period featured several pro-business
policies and reforms including import liberalisation, export incentives, exchange
rate policies, and expansionary fiscal policy.
Phase III: 1990-2008
In the first three years of the 1990s, the GDP grew at 4 per cent annually. In the
following four years, the growth rate jumped to 7.1 per cent but only to fall back
to 5.2 per cent in the succeeding five years. The underlying trend growth rate
during the decade was just over 6 per cent. However, subsequently the period
2003-08 saw the real GDP grow at 8.2 per cent annually. Meanwhile population
growth rate stabilised at around 1.1% per annum. The sustained growth at 8 per
cent plus resulted from many serious policy initiatives on the part of the
government. Significant lowering of tariff and nontariff barriers (trade policy
reforms) along with a major revamping of industrial policies, especially the
withdrawal of industrial regulation and liberalisation of foreign direct investment
(FDI) were introduced. These, coupled with favourable external environment in
the form of rising exports and increasing inflows of foreign capital, set in motion
three factors which can be described as three engines of growth.
One, consumption spending was a large contributor to the growth performance.
Decreasing relative prices of many goods and services as a result of domestic
and global competition, competitive pressures in retail finance and steadily rising
incomes compound into a powerful force, even if each of the components may
not be very large. Two, investment in new capacity was the second engine of
growth. Investment activity is characterised by a certain lumpiness, which means
1.Prof. Raj Krishna had believed that the economy was caught in the “low level equilibrium trap
of slow growth” of 3.5 per cent annual growth rate. This came to be known as ‘Hindu Rate of
Growth’.


--- Page 35 ---
34
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview
that capacity addition comes in spurts, exceeding immediate requirements but
anticipating a subsequent catch-up in demand. Investment spending, consequently,
goes up sharply at the beginning of a cycle and declines just as abruptly once the
desired capacity has been created. The investment cycle was on upswing. Three,
exports of both goods and services were the third engine of growth. India’s
merchandise exports got getting diversified geographically and, therefore, were
not very vulnerable to localised business cycles. All these three engines gained
an additional boost by what appears to be a sustained, across-the-board increase
in productivity.
But this phase also shared one major weakness with the previous phase: labour-
intensive manufacturing remained sluggish. The end to licensing and to the small-
scale industries reservation in most labour-intensive products did not have the
intended outcomes in this sector. The reasons for this are well-known (labour
market rigidities facing large-scale producers, infrastructure bottlenecks and
bureaucratic red tape). Unfortunately, without rapid expansion of the unskilled-
labour-intensive industry, progress towards poverty reduction and transition to a
modern economy will remain far slower than is feasible.
Phase IV: 2008-2014
The growth process slowed during 2008-09 in the wake of the global economic
crisis, although some indicators of slowdown had made their presence felt even
earlier. Global economic crisis resulted in (i) fall in inflows of foreign direct
investment, (ii) rise in outflows on account of portfolio disinvestment, (iii)
 de
cline
in export orders from developed market economies, as a result of which domestic
investment, employment and consumption slowed down. The slowdown affected
all sectors of the economy; growth rate in service sector during 2008-09 came
down to 9.3 per cent, against 10.8 in 2007-08, in agriculture to 1.6 per cent from
4.9 per cent, and in industry to 3.9 per cent from 7.4 per cent. The decline in
service activity could be attributed to lower demand for off-shoring and IT and
IT-enabled services from the US and Europe, where several economies are
grappling with debt problems. There was also an impact on financial services as
banking activity slowed down on account of higher interest rates and investors
were scared of parking their funds in stock markets. Real GDP growth rate slowed
down to 6.5% per cent during 2011-12. It continued to be low on subsequent two
years 2012-13 and 2013-14. Apart from the slow recovery in India’s export
destinations there were several domestic policy concerns including– ban on iron
ore mining, cancellation of coal blocks, delays in environmental clearances,
emergence of the Non Performing Asset (NPA) crisis and the consequent double
balance-sheet problem that resulted in this slowdown.
Another major concern at this stage, though not entirely unexpected, was the
sharp dip in the growth rate of private consumption. Four factors seem to have
contributed to this slowdown. First, it could be due to the wealth effect, resulting
from a decline in the asset (equity/property) prices. Second, the uncertainty in
the labour market and some decline in employment in India’s tradable sectors
may have moderated the growth in consumption expenditure. Third, cutbacks in
consumer credit by private banks, NBFCs and other lenders, because of their
limited deposit base and difficulties in secondary market financing because of
the knock-on effect of global financial market freezing. Fourth, during slowdown
a dominance of precautionary motive may have induced consumers to either
defer their spending decisions or shift to unbranded lower quality alternatives.


--- Page 36 ---
35
Growth and Structure of
Indian Economy
Similarly, the slowdown in the growth rate of gross fixed capital formation
(GFCC) was an area of policy concern from the point of an early return to the
high GDP growth path. Apart from the demand shock to the economy several
reasons could have contributed to deceleration in growth of GFCF. First, surge
in domestic inflation in the first half of 2008 reinforced the tightening of monetary
policy. It affected the cost and availability of funds for investment. Second, since
inflation was largely on account of metals and fuels, bulk of it was absorbed by
industry, which affected its internal accruals and profitability, reducing the
investible funds. Third, despite monetary policy becoming accommodative in
the second half of 2008, decline in interest rates were not up to the industry
expectations.
A significant stimulus package in three tranches was put in place by the
government involving expansion in government spending and reduction in indirect
taxes to boost domestic demand. By the end of the year 2008-09, India was
rapidly returning to the buoyant years preceding 2008.
Phase V: 2014-2019 and 2019 onwards
During the period from 2014-15 to 2018-19, Indian economy registered an average
GDP growth rate of 7.5 per cent. Several initiatives taken by the government to
spur growth include — government following the 4 R approach of Recognition,
Resolution, Recapitalisation and Reforms to strengthen banks and foster clean
and responsible banking, simplification of the Labour Laws, bringing reforms in
Corporate Affairs, introduction of e-Clearances, relaxing foreign direct investment
rules, easing Know Your Customer (KYCs) for investors in Capital Markets,
rendering more support to Non-Banking Finance Companies (NBFCs)/ Housing
Finance Companies (HFCs) and Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs),
introduction of indirect tax reform in the form of Goods and Services Tax (GST),
introduction of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) for the speedy resolution
of insolvency and bankruptcy cases of companies, Demonetisation to curb black
money, corruption and counterfeit notes, which in turn opened gates for cashless
economy, etc.
India’s GDP growth moderated to 5 per cent in 2019-20 as compared to 6.8 per
cent in 2018-19, amidst a weak environment for global manufacturing, trade and
demand. The economic state of the Indian economy from 2019 onwards may be
identified as ‘pause phase’.  During the pause phase the clouds over India’s
economic performance and prospects are getting bigger and darker. First, India’s
economic growth has slowed, aggregate investment has slackened and it could
get worse. Second, inflation needs to be monitored. Third, the country’s external
imbalances are growing at a time when capital flows are becoming more volatile.
Fourth, with investment momentum remaining significantly below its trend, the
persistent weakness in consumption is a concern. Consumption has typically
provided a steady and elevated floor for India’s growth. Fifth, the sub-segment
of “trade, hotels, transport and communications,” which is typically an important
source of resilience for the services sector, is slowing consistently. Sixth, growth
in agriculture may take some hit. Seventh, the fiscal-monetary mix is completely
out of work and there is hardly any flexibility on the fiscal front. More importantly,
some fiscal responsibility will warrant spending cuts and revenue enhancement
in order to shrink the fiscal deficit. Likewise, the RBI is expected to anchor
expectations without offering one-or two-year forward guidance. Finally,
the
 i
mpact o
f C
ovid-19 pandemic on
 t
he Indian economy has been largely
