--- Page 121 ---
120
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview
5.3.1.2 Railways
The Indian Railways is among the largest rail networks in the world. The Indian
Railways route length network is spread over 1,23,236 km, with 13,452 passenger
trains and 9,141 freight trains from 7,349 stations plying 23 million travellers
and 3 million tonnes (MT) of freight daily. The railway network is ideal for long-
distance travel and movement of bulk commodities, apart from being an energy
efficient and economic mode of conveyance and transport. Indian Railways is
the preferred carrier of automobiles in the country.
Government of India has focused on investing in railway infrastructure by making
investor-friendly policies. It has moved quickly to enable Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI) in railways to improve infrastructure for freight and high-speed
trains. At present, several domestic and foreign companies are also looking to
invest in Indian rail projects. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) inflows into
Railways Related Components from April 2000 to June 2020 stood at US$ 1.12
billion.
Government initiatives
Few initiatives taken up by the Government are:
Freight on Priority: Railways has embraced a “Freight on Priority” policy
by pushing for an aggressive customer-centric approach to expand the freight
carried not only from the traditional segments but also by attracting new
customers to its fold.
India entered a new era of mobility with Vande Bharat Express - India’s
first high-tech, energy-efficient, self-propelled train. This is a prime example
of the success of Make in India movement. This train will be proliferated
across India and also exported globally.
The Railways is undertaking measures for improving speed of both passenger
and freight trains. Indian Railway is constructing more than 3000 km of
Dedicated Freight Corridor (DFC), which would enable freight trains to run
at speed of 100 kmph.
 
Dedicated Freight Corridors which are special tracks and arrangements for
goods trains are getting completed at unprecedented speed. They are expected
to decongest the existing Indian Railway network, 
 increase 
the average
speed of goods trains from existing 25 to 70 kmph., run Heavy Haul trains,
facilitate the running of longer (1.5 km) and double stack container trains,
connect the existing ports and industrial areas for faster movement of goods,
ensure an energy efficient and environment friendly rail transport system as
per global standards, increase the rail share from existing 30 per cent to 45
per cent and reduce the logistic cost of transportation.
New Services in Passenger Operations with PPP in Train Operations:
Railways is now undertaking a partnership approach for passenger train
operations in order to enhance overall service quality and operational
efficiency. This aims at improving the passenger experience and bringing
modern technologies and private investments
India has made a huge leap of self-sufficiency in manufacturing related
activities of the Railways. India is now building modern trains for itself and
exporting it as well. For instance, in Uttar Pradesh only, the Locomotive


--- Page 122 ---
121
Physical and Social
Infrastructure
Works in Varanasi is becoming a big electric locomotive centre in India.
The railway coaches which are being built here are now being exported to
foreign countries also.
A National Rail Plan (NRP) 2030 has been developed with a view to develop
infrastructure by 2030 to cater to the traffic requirements upto 2050. Based
on the NRP, a Vision 2024 document has been prepared to develop
infrastructure by 2024 to enhance modal share of Railways in freight
transportation to more than 40 per cent and to cater to the traffic requirements
upto 2030.
Electrification has been accorded high priority as a part of the national goal
to transform India into a green nation. 66 per cent of track length has been
electrified by November 2020. Railways aim to complete electrification of
its entire broad-gauge network by 2023. The speed of electrification has
been greatly scaled up from a level of 1176 km in 2014-15 to 5276 in 2018-
19 and 4378 km in 2019-20.
Government has enhanced the role of the PPP beyond providing maintenance
in the areas such as redevelopment of stations, building private freight
terminals and private container train operations.
5.3.1.3 Shipping and Ports
Ports are economic and service provision units of remarkable significance since
they act as a place for the interchange of two transport modes, maritime and
land, whether by rail or road. With a coastline of about 7,517 km. Indian ports
and shipping industry plays a vital role in sustaining growth in the country’s
trade and commerce. According to the Ministry of Shipping, around 95 per cent
of the country’s trading by volume and 70 per cent by value is done through
maritime transport. The country has 12 major ports and 212 notified non-major
(minor/intermediate) ports along the coast-line and sea-islands. 
 Man
y ports in
India (such as Mundra Port, Sikka Port, Hazira Port, etc.) are evolving into
specialised centres of economic activities and services and are vital to sustain
future economic growth of the country. Over the last decade, there has been a
steady increase in handling of cargo traffic at Indian ports (refer Table 5.3). The
compound annual growth rate of total cargo throughput at Indian ports during
the period 2001-02 to 2018-19 was 7.4 per cent.
Table 5.3: Growth of Cargo at Indian Ports
Parameters 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19
Trends in India’s Select: Macro Parameters
Total Cargo 2.2 4.1 8.2 1.9 5.8 6.6 6.1
Source: Based on Data from Major ports and Non-major ports.
However, Indian ports face several infrastructural and operational challenges.
They include: (i) Operational efficiency of Indian ports still lags behind the global
average. For instance, the turnaround time (TAT) at major ports was approximately
2.5 days in 2018-19, whereas global average benchmark is 1-2 days. (ii) last
mile connectivity to the ports is one of the major constraints in smooth movement
of cargo to/from the hinterland. Around 87 per cent of Indian freight uses either
road or rail for transportation of goods where a significant share experiences
“idle time” due to capacity constraints on highways and railway lines. Water-


--- Page 123 ---
122
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview
borne transport which is much safer, cheaper and cleaner, compared to other
modes of transportation accounts for less than 6% of India’s modal split.
Significant savings can be achieved by shifting movement of industrial
commodities like coal, iron ore, cement and steel to coastal and inland waterways.
(iii) location of industries / manufacturing centres vis-à-vis the ports is such that
the country has a greater container exporting cost than that compared with
competitors like China. Hence, greater savings could be possible with the presence
of major manufacturing and industrial zones in coastal regions in India.
Government initiatives
The Indian Government plays an important role in supporting the ports sector. It
has allowed Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) of up to 100 per cent under the
automatic route for port and harbour construction and maintenance projects. Ports
sector in India has received a cumulative FDI of US $ 1.64 billion between April
2000 and March 2019. In March 2018, a revised Model Concession Agreement
(MCA) was approved to make port projects more investor-friendly and make
investment climate in the sector more attractive. In addition to this, project
UNNA TI has been started by Government of India to identify the opportunity
areas for improvement in the operations of major ports. Under the project, 116
initiatives were identified out of which 91 initiatives have been implemented as
of November 2018.
Sagarmala – a Port-led Development Programme
The concept of Sagarmala was approved by the Union Cabinet on 25
th March
2015. As part of the programme, a National Perspective Plan (NPP) for the
comprehensive development of India’s 7,500 km coastline, 14,500 km of
potentially navigable waterways and maritime sector has been prepared.
Components of Sagarmala Programme are:
Port Modernisation and New Port Development:  De-bottlenecking and
capacity expansion of existing ports and development of new greenfield ports
Port Connectivity Enhancement: Enhancing the connectivity of the ports to
the hinterland, optimising cost and time of cargo movement through multi-modal
logistics solutions including domestic waterways (inland water transport and
coastal shipping)
Port-linked Industrialisation: Developing port-proximate industrial clusters
and Coastal Economic Zones to reduce logistics cost and time of EXIM and
domestic cargo.
Coastal Community Development:  Promoting sustainable development of
coastal communities through skill development and livelihood generation
activities, fisheries development, coastal tourism etc.
Coastal Shipping and Inland Waterways Transport: Impetus to move cargo
through the sustainable and environment-friendly coastal and inland waterways
mode.
The Indian government plans to develop 10 coastal economic regions as part of
plans to revive the country’s Sagarmala (string of ports) project.
