--- Page 16 ---
15
Indian Economic
Development – A Historical
Perspective
Tirtankar Roy, “changed little during British rule”( The Economic History of
India 1857-1947, Tirthankar Roy, OUP, 2011, P.110). Indian peasants continued
to use the primitive implements they had used for centuries. For example, it is
estimated that in 1951, there were only 0.93 million iron ploughs in use while
wooden ploughs numbered 31.3 million. The use of inorganic fertilizers was
virtually unknown, while a large part of animal manure–cow dung, night soil
and cattle bones–were wasted. In 1938-39, only 11 per cent of all cropped land
was under improved seeds, their use being largely confined to non-food cash
crops.
Agricultural education was completely neglected. In 1946, there were only nine
agricultural colleges. There was hardly any investment in terracing, flood-control,
drainage, or desalination of soil. Irrigation was the only field in which some
progress was made.
Thus, the peasantry was crushed under the triple burden of the government, the
zamindar or landlord, and the moneylender. After these three had taken their
share not much was left for the cultivator and his family to subsist on. It has been
calculated, remarks Bipan Chandra “that by the end of the colonial period, the
rent and interest paid by the peasantry amounted to Rs. 1,400 million per year.
By 1937, the total rural debt amounted to Rs. 18,000 million” ( India Since
Independence, Penguin, 2008 The Digital Edition, 2011, P.23).
The result was continued impoverishment of peasantry, along with an increase
in the incidence and adverse consequences of famines on the poor. People died
in millions whenever droughts or floods caused failure of crops and scarcity.
The human and institutional factors became more important than nature’s fury in
causing distress and starvation.
1.3.6 Ruin of Artisans and Handicrafts
At the beginning of the British rule in mid-18th century, India supplied quarter of
all manufactured goods produced in the world and textiles was the chief export
item of India’s  European trade. British conquest destroyed the unity between
the agriculture and the manufacturing sectors that characterised traditional Indian
society. The villages lost their autonomy and self-sufficiency. The oppression
practiced by the East India Company and its servants on the craftsmen of Bengal
during the second half of the 18
thcentury, forcing them to sell their goods below
the market price and to hire their services below the prevailing wage, compelled
many of them to abandon their ancestral professions.
In the wake of the industrial revolution, there was a sudden collapse of urban
handicrafts industry which had for centuries made India’s name a byword in the
European markets.  Not only did this export demand gradually evaporate, but
colonial rule opened Indian markets for British manufactured goods. After 1813,
the British imposed a policy of one
-way
 free trade upon India and the invasion
of British manufactures, in particular cotton textiles, followed immediately. Indian
goods made with primitive techniques could not compete with goods produced
on a mass scale by powerful steam-operated machines. The worst hits were cotton-
weaving and spinning industries. Other industries that suffered were silk and
woollen textiles, oil-pressing, tanning, dyeing, iron, pottery, metals, and shipping
industries. This led to ‘deindustrialisation’ or destruction of the indigenous
industry. While India produced about 25 per cent of the world’s industrial output


--- Page 17 ---
16
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview
in 1750, this figure fell to only 2 per cent by 1900. The decline of Indian handicrafts
was reflected in the collapse of the industrial towns and cities, such as Surat,
Dacca, Murshidabad.
With introduction of railways, the destruction of Indian industries, particularly
rural artisan industries, proceeded even more rapidly. The railways enabled British
manufactures to reach and uproot the traditional industries in the remotest villages
of the country The destruction of rural crafts broke up the union between
agriculture and domestic industry in the countryside. This contributed to the
decline of the self-sufficient rural economy. This blow to the Indian handicraft
textile industry in early 19
thcentury is believed to have pushed many industrial
workers into other low-paying occupations, intensifying poverty. The ruined
artisan failed to find alternative employment because of lack of growth of modern
industries. Hence, craftsmen fell back on the land as tenants, sharecroppers, and
agricultural labourers.
1.3.7 Status of Modern Industries
Under the British rule, the Indian industry suffered numerous constraints.
Between, the 1850’s (when the first major industries started) and 1914, India
created the world’s largest jute manufacturing industry, fourth or fifth largest
cotton textile industry, and the third largest railway network. Modern industrial
processes, however, did not spread easily from sector to sector. Thus, at the time
of independence, India was largely non-industrial and one of the world’s poorest
areas. The period that witnessed industrialisation of Europe, also witnessed de-
industrialisation of the Indian economy.
Although all basic requirements for economic growth were available in India:
labour (skilled), capital, market, and spirit of enterprise, yet the economy could
not regain the path it had traversed in the past. All this was largely due to the
colonial rule and the policies that were followed to sustain that regime. Indeed,
most analysis of the colonial India has attributed the unsatisfactory performance
of the economy and the absence of modern industrial development to either British
policy, which inhibited local initiative. Every time colonial grip became weak
due to crisis faced by the government, Indian industry thrived. This happened,
for instance, when Britain was drawn into the two World Wars.
The machine age in India began when cotton textile, jute and coal-mining
industries were started in the 1850s. The first textile mill was opened in Bombay
by Cowasjee Nanabhoy in 1853, and the first jute mill in Bengal in 1855.These
industries gradually expanded. By first decade of the 20
thcentury, India had 206
cotton mills employing nearly 1,96,000 persons. In 1901, there were over 36
jute mills employing nearly 1,15,000 persons. The coal-mining industry employed
nearly one lakh persons in 1906.Other mechanical industries which developed
during the second half of the 19
thand the beginning of the 20thcentury were cotton
gins and presses, rice, flour and timber mills, leather tanneries, woollen textiles,
sugar mills, iron and steel works, and such mineral industries as salt, mica and
saltpetre. Cement, paper, matches, sugar, and glass industries developed during
the 1930s. But all these industries had a very stunted growth.
Most of the modern Indian industries were owned or controlled by the British
capital. Only in the cotton textile industry did Indians have a large presence
from the very beginning, and in the 1930s, the sugar industry was developed by


--- Page 18 ---
17
Indian Economic
Development – A Historical
Perspective
Indians. There were many reasons for the domination of enterprise by British
managing agencies. Banks were mostly controlled by British financers. It was
not easy for Indians to get credit from Banks. Even when they got loans, they
had to pay high interest rates while foreigners could borrow on much easier
terms. Of course, Indians began to develop their own banks and insurance
companies gradually. In 1914, foreign banks held over 70 per cent of all bank
deposits in India; by 1937, their share had decreased to 57 per cent. British
enterprises in India also took advantage of their close connection with British
suppliers of machinery and equipment, shipping, insurance companies, marketing
agencies, government officials and political leaders to maintain their dominant
position in the Indian economy. Moreover, the government followed a conscious
policy of favouring foreign capital as against Indian capital.
The railway policy of the government also discriminated against Indian enterprise;
railway freight rates encouraged imports at the cost of trade in domestic products.
It was more difficult and costlier to distribute Indian goods than to distribute
imported goods. Another serious weakness of Indian industrialisation in the
colonial period was the almost complete absence of heavy or capital goods
industries, without which there can be no rapid and independent development of
industries. India lacked such basic industries as steel, metallurgy, machine,
chemical and oil in 1950. The country met about 90 per cent of its needs of
machine tools through imports.  India also lagged in the develop
-
ment of electric
power.
The 19thcentury also witnessed the growth of plantation industries such as indigo,
tea and coffee. They were almost exclusively owned by Europeans. Indigo
manufacturing was introduced into India at the end of the 18 thcentury and
flourished in Bengal and Bihar. It was used as dye in manufacturing textile.
Peasants were compelled to cultivate indigo instead of food crops. This oppression
of indigo planters was vividly portrayed by the famous Bengali writer Dinbandhu
Mitra in his play Neel Darpan in 1860. With the invention of a synthetic dye the
indigo industry gradually declined.
The tea industry developed in Assam, Bengal, south India, and the hills of
Himachal Pradesh. It was assisted by the government with grants of rent-free
land and other facilities. In time, the use of tea spread across India and it also
became an important item of export. Coffee plantations developed during this
period in south India.
The plantation and other foreign-owned industries were of hardly any advantage
to the Indian people. Their profits went out of the country. Most of their products
were sold in foreign markets and the foreign exchange so earned was utilised by
Britain. A large part of their salary bill was spent on highly paid foreign staff.
They purchased most of their equipment abroad. Most of their technical staff
was foreign. The only advantage that Indians got out of these industries was the
creation of unskilled jobs. Most of the workers in these enterprises were, however,
extremely low paid, and they worked under extremely harsh conditions for very
long hours.
Overall, industrial progress in India was exceedingly slow. Both in terms of
production and employment, the level of industrial development was stunted
and paltry compared to the developed countries of the time. It did not compensate
the output and employment loss of the handicraft industries that it had displaced.
