--- Page 22 ---
21
Indian Economic
Development – A Historical
Perspective
1.6 MACROECONOMIC POLICY
Indian economy during the British era suffered from low levels and growth rates
of national and per capita income, stagnant agriculture sector, falling share of
indigenous handicraft industry, weak capital goods industry base,  foreign trade
oriented to feed the Industrial Revolution in Britain, prevalence of rampant poverty
and unemployment and what not. The state of the economy could be clearly
depicted with the help of the following macroeconomic indicators:
1.6.1 Savings and Investments
Expansion of an economy depends on the process of capital accumulation, which
is a function of the magnitude and utilisation of economic surplus or savings
generated in an economy for investment. The net savings in the Indian economy
from 1914 to 1946 was only 2.75 per cent of Gross National Product (GNP).
This magnitude may be contrasted with the net savings in 1971-75 when they
constituted 12 per cent of GNP and more recently in 2017-18 the share of gross
savings was 30.5 per cent of GDP. The share of total capital formation had been
6.75 per cent of GNP during 1914-46 as against 20.14 per cent of GNP during
1971-75, and 32.3 per cent of GDP in 2017-18. Moreover, the share of industry
in this low level of capital formation was small with machinery forming only
1.78 per cent of GNP during 1914-46. This figure was 6.53 per cent of GNP in
1971-75.
A considerable part of India’s social surplus or savings was appropriated by the
colonial state and deployed to finance its strategic interests. Another large part
was appropriated by the indigenous landlords and moneylenders. According to
Bipan Chandra, by the end of the colonial period, the rent and interest paid by
the peasantry amounted to Rs. 1,400 million per year. Only a very small part of
this large surplus was invested in the development of agriculture and industry.
1.6.2 Fiscal Policy
A feature of India’s governance was the role played by the State in constructing,
determining, and maintaining different aspects of the colonial structure to rule
the country. India’s policies were determined in Britain and in the interests of the
British economy and the British capitalist class. Thus, an important reason for
the underdevelopment of India was the denial of State support to industry and
agriculture. This was contrary to what happened in nearly all the capitalist
countries, including Britain, which enjoyed active State support in the early stages
of development. Some other aspects of the policy framework that guided colonial
rule in India were:
i) Regressive Tax Structure
The Indian tax structure was highly inequitable. While the peasants were
burdened with paying a heavy land revenue for most of the colonial period
and the poor with the salt tax, etc., the upper-income groups comprising
highly paid bureaucrats, landlords, merchants, and traders hardly paid any
taxes. The level of direct taxes was quite low. The number of income-tax
payers was 3,60,000 in 1946-47. It was under pressure from the national
and peasant movements that the land revenue and salt tax started coming
down in the 20
th century. As late as 1900-01, land revenue and salt tax formed
53 per cent and 16 per cent of the total tax revenue of the government.


--- Page 23 ---
22
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview
ii) Military Expenditure
The colonial state devoted almost its entire income to meeting the needs of
the British Indian administration, making payments of direct and indirect
tribute to Britain and in serving the needs of British trade and industry. The
bulk of public revenue was absorbed by the military expenditure and civil
administration which was geared to maintenance of law and order and tax
collection. After 1890, military expenditure absorbed nearly 50 per cent of
the central government’s income. In 1947-48, this figure stood at nearly 47
per cent.
iii) Meagre Spending on Development of Agriculture, Industry, and Social
Infrastructure
As pointed out earlier, a very large part of India’s social surplus was
appropriated by the colonial state, but a very small part of it was spent by it
on the development of agriculture or industry or on social infrastructure or
nation-building activities such as education, sanitation and health services.
1.6.3 Trade Policy
The two centuries (1757-1947) recorded major structural changes in the trade
policy. The period can be divided into four parts: 1759-1813, 1813-1850, 1850-
1914, and 1914-1947.
i) 1759-1813
The first period can be termed as the age of Mercantilism. During this period,
the East India Company established its political supremacy, attempted to
enforce exclusive monopolistic trade between India and Britain.
Nevertheless, the company was largely unsuccessful due to activities of
private traders. The important characteristics of the trade was that Indian
trade continued to flow along the traditional channels and its composition
was based on an exchange of fine textiles, foodstuffs and other raw materials
for precious metals and certain manufactured products. The East India
Company financed a large volume of its trade through the surplus from the
budgetary sources  of its India possessions.(see 1.4 Drain of Wealth).
The East India Company used its dominant position to compel weavers and
other producers of export commodities to supply their output to the English
Company at a specified price determined by the latter.  Thus the principle of
freely negotiable contract was now increasingly abandoned. The use of
budgetary surplus to finance export of goods to Europe and the silver to
finance the Company purchase of tea and silk in China led to contraction of
money supply, threw out of balance the whole banking and monetary system,
and provoked loud complaints from native traders and foreign merchants.
Due to the pressure by the private traders and the decline of Mercantilist
doctrines in England, exclusive monopoly in Indian trade was abolished in
1813, and the East India Company was debarred from trading in 1833.
ii) 1813-1850
A major structural change took place during this period in the commodity
composition of the Indian trade, which continued until the end of World
War I. India was gradually transformed from being an exporter of


--- Page 24 ---
23
Indian Economic
Development – A Historical
Perspective
manufacture products (largely textiles) into a supplier of primary
commodities, importing finished consumer goods and certain intermediate
industrial goods in return. In 1811-12, the percentage share of piece goods
(fabrics, made in standard widths and lengths) in total export values from
Calcutta was 33 per cent, in 1814-15 it was 14.3  per cent, and in 1839-40
just 5 per cent. Between 1814 and 1850, four commodities that dominated
the exports baskets were indigo, raw silk, opium and cotton.
iii) 1850-1914
The construction of railway lines in India during 1850’s and the outbreak of
Crimean War gave new impetus to the sub-continental trade. In the following
two decades, volume and value of foreign trade increased phenomenally
due to American civil war and opening of Suez Canal. There was general
reduction in oceanic freight. Rapid industrialisation of continental countries,
the US and Japan created a new level of demand for raw materials and food
stuffs. This was the great age of multilateral trade and international payments.
iv) 1914-1947
The age of multilateral trade and the frictionless gold standard exchange
system ended abruptly in 1914. The conditions under which Indian foreign
trade was conducted in post-war period were dictated by– worldwide
industrial reorganisation, growth of bilateral trading arrangements, a policy
of tariff protection, and foreign exchange controls. In addition, India, along
with the other exporters of primary commodities suffered from the World
Depression of 1929. As a result of these developments, the general trend of
India’s foreign trade during the inter-war period were showed wide
fluctuations. The last seven years from the outbreak of the World War II to
1946 were characterised by wartime controls and large-scale political
upheaval preceding India’s independence in 1947, influencing the trade
flows.
Before the uprising of 1857 the commercial policy was guided by the twin
principles of extending protection to British imports and using tariffs for revenue
mobilisation. In Bengal, the rates of duties on exports and imports were fixed at
5 to 10 percent in 1810. In line with the principle of favouring British trade and
shipping, next year the duty rates on goods carried by foreign ships were doubled.
Subsequently, the duty on British imports was reduced to 2.5 per cent. Similarly,
in view of the serious state of public finances in post-1857 period, the government
in 1859 sharply raised duties on goods including cotton textiles from Britain.
There was a public outcry in Britain and in 1862 import duty on cotton was
reduced from 10 to 5 per cent.
Throughout the period an unusual characteristic of India’s foreign trade was the
existence of a large export surplus which was not accompanied by either a rise in
her foreign exchange reserves or an increase in overseas lending. This surplus
was used for unilateral transfer of funds that India had to make to Britain as part
of the political charges or the political “tribute
’’. This was debited to her external
account. It was also used to partly settle Britain’s trade deficit with US and Europe.
Tariff policy was looked upon by India nationalists as the main instrument of
British economic imperialism. Until the First World War, there was no import
duty, which could possibly offer any sort of protection to any of the Indian
