--- Page 52 ---
51
Growth and Structure of
Indian Economy
economic development and human well-being, with a focus on affordable and
equitable access for all.
2.6 LET US SUM UP
In this unit we have reviewed the growth profile of the Indian economy. For this
purpose we have relied upon the national income data published by the Central
Statistical Office of the Government of India. The analysis of the data has thrown
some interesting facts which are briefly stated as follows:
Over the last seven decades growth has maintained a rising trend.
Although rising, the rate of growth has been relatively slow.
The growth has been topsy-turvy; dramatic increase in some years followed
by a sharp fall in subsequent years, e.g., the period 2015-19 followed by the
year 2019-20.
Medium and long-term prospects are bright; but the economy would have
to bear the global fate. Growth rates are projected to fall over whole of the
globe.
Macro-economic stability is an essential prerequisite for achieving the growth
needed for development.
Growth does not trickle down; development must address human needs
directly.
No one policy will trigger development – a comprehensive approach is
needed.
Institutions matter, sustained development should be rooted in processes
that are socially inclusive and responsive to changing circumstances.
We have also analysed the data to examine the changes that have taken place in
the structure of the Indian economy over the last seven decades. This analysis
has brought out a unique feature of India’s economic growth: structural change
in the Indian economy has deviated from the historical experience of other
countries, to begin with, build up a strong agricultural base that laid foundations
for rapid growth of industry. This resulted in evolution of a sound industrial base
that served as a jumping pad for another transition: transition to a service/
commercial economy. India, on the contrary has made a jump from the first
stage to the third stage. The result is an absence of a strong manufacturing
foundation this has remains implications for removing poverty and
unemployment.
We will address the issues in the subsequent units of the present course.
2.7 TERM - END EXERCISES
1) Examine in brief the different phases of growth of the Indian economy since
1991.
2) “The pattern of structural change in the Indian economy has deviated from
the development pattern of Western and South Asian economies.” Examine
this statement.
3) The unorganised sector dominates the Indian economy. Do you agree?


--- Page 53 ---
52
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview 2.8 KEY WORDS
Association of Southeast : A regional grouping that promotes economic,
Asian Nations (ASEAN) political, and security cooperation among its ten
members: Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos,
Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand, and Vietnam.
Federalism : The distribution of power in an organisation
(such as a government) between a central
authority and the constituent units.
Fiscal Deficit : The difference between the total income of the
government (total taxes and non-debt capital
receipts) and its total expenditure.
Free Trade Agreement : A treaty between two or more countries to
(FTA) facilitate trade and eliminate trade barriers.
Gross Fixed Capital : As per RBI, Gross capital formation refers to
Formation the ‘aggregate of gross additions to fixed assets
(that is fixed capital formation) plus change in
stocks during the counting period.’
 
Inso
lvency and : The bankruptcy law of India which seeks to
Bankruptcy Code consolidate the existing framework by creating
(IBC), 2016 a single law for insolvency and bankruptcy to
resolve insolvency in a time-bound manner.
Minimum Support Prices : MSP is an agricultural product price, set by the
(MSP) Government of India to purchase directly from
the farmer.
 
Unorganised Se
ctor : As per ‘Ministry of Labour and Employment’—
Unorganised sector means an enterprise owned
by individuals or self-employed workers and
engaged in the production or sale of goods or
providing service of any kind whatsoever, and
where the enterprise employs workers, the
number of such workers is less than ten.
2.9 REFERENCES
1) Ishwar C. (2019) Dhingra, Indian Economy in the Twenty-First Century,
Manakin Press, New Delhi.
2) The World Bank, (March 2018). India Development Update: India’s Growth
Story. Retrieved from http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/
814101517840592525/pdf/India-development-update-Indias-growth-
story.pdf
3) Patnaik I and Pandey R. (2019). Savings and capital formation in India.
Retrieved from https://macrofinance.nipfp.org.in/PDF/PatnaikPandey-
savings_and_capital_formation_in_India.pdf


--- Page 54 ---
53
Growth and Structure of
Indian Economy
4) Kumar P. (May 2020). The Economic Impact of COVID 19 with special
reference to India. Retrieved from http://164.100.47.193/Refinput/
New_Reference_Notes/English/06072020_125312_1021205239.pdf
2.10 ANSWERS OR HINTS TO CHECK YOUR
PROGRESS EXERCISES
Check Your Progress 1
1) See Section 2.2
2) See Section 2.2
3) See Section 2.2
Check Your Progress 2
1) See Section 2.3
2) See Sub-section 2.3.5
3) See Sub-section 2.3.4
Check Your Progress 3
1) See Sub-section 2.4.3
2) See Sub-section 2.4.4
3) See Sub-section 2.4.5
