--- Page 49 ---
48
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview
proceeded at a rapid pace with more than 20 per cent of the existing highway
length of 132,000 km being constructed in the last four years alone. The UDAAN
scheme was launched in 2017 to foster regional connectivity by extending flight
connectivity to Tier-3 and Tier-4 towns in the country. The infrastructure of the
North-Eastern states was a special focus and there has been a significant
improvement in connectivity with the building of key bridges, and the expansion
of railways/highways.
2.5.1.4 Federalism
Fiscal federalism strengthened significantly when the Fourteenth Finance
Commission increased the share of states in the divisible pool of central taxes
from 32 per cent to 42 per cent. Although central grants to states saw compensatory
cuts, the shift empowers states to manage their revenues and expenditures
independently. The launch of the GST (Goods and Services Tax) in July, 2017
added a new dimension to centre-state and inter-state financial relations. The
GST Council experience provides key learning for implementing cooperative
federalism in several other areas such as labour and land regulation. Niti Aayog
has helped institutionalise cooperative federalism by setting up teams from both
the states and the central government to jointly evolve strategies for addressing
development challenges. States have also been involved in a friendly competition
to improve their Key Performance Indicators (KPIs).
2.5.1.5 Corporate Exits
When the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) was introduced in 2016, it
consolidated the insolvency resolution process into a single law by repealing/
amending multiple rules and processes earlier in operation. IBC set a time limit
for closing of insolvency and bankruptcy cases within which assets of a defaulting
borrower are auctioned to pay off the debt owed to lending institutions. Following
the operationalisation of IBC since 2017, a significant number of non-performing
assets have been brought under its ambit. In addition to the large sums recovered
by creditors from resolution or liquidation, the introduction of a framework for
exit has improved the overall business culture of the country.
2.5.1.5 Demonetisation
The government of India took a bold step to demonetise Rs. 500 and Rs. 1000
currency with effect from 8 November 2016 midnight. It was a major decision
which had its impact on all sections of the society. It was aimed to reduce funds
to terrorism, decrease the corruption rate, eliminate counterfeit notes, and open
gates for a cashless economy. Through the demonetisation exercise, the
government has been pressing hard to become a cashless economy and is
encouraging more and more people to adopt the digital payments system for
their transactions.
2.5.1.6 Goods and Services Tax (GST)
Implemented on July 1, 2017, the Goods and Services Tax (GST)is regarded as
the biggest and substantial indirect tax reform since independence. GST has
replaced a number of Central and State taxes, made India more of a national
integrated market, and brought more producers into the tax net. It has subsumed
all sorts of indirect taxes like Central Excise Tax, V AT/Sales Tax, Service tax,


--- Page 50 ---
49
Growth and Structure of
Indian Economy
etc. and implement one taxation system in India. The main aim of GST is to
create a single, unified market which will benefit in the development of country’s
economy. GST taxes only the final consumer. Hence the cascading of taxes (tax-
on-tax) is avoided and production costs are cut down. The system is expected to
improvise tax collections and boost up India’s economic development and break
all tax barriers between Central and State Governments.
Aided by all these features, the Indian economy rebounded back on high growth
trajectory. While rest of the world was cooling off with growth rates slowing
down, the Indian economy recorded highest-ever growth rates during the period
2014-19, clocking an average of about 7.5 per cent per annum. It is widely-
accepted that India cannot meaningfully regain its economic momentum unless
corporate investments are brought on track. The sort of demand stimulus that the
government has preferred despite supply constraints will only add to inflationary
pressures. Public investment cannot play a major role in the recovery unless
there is a significant shift of public spending away from subsidies and towards
asset creation. A private investment revival is thus the magic key. Unwinding the
current policy tangle is key to reviving animal spirits.
2.5.2 The Challenges That Remain
GDP growth in India has followed an inverted U-shaped curve, accelerating
from a low of 5.5 per cent in 2012-13 to a peak of 8.2 per cent in 2016-17 and
then decelerated to 6.8 per cent in 2018-19.The GDP growth decline is due to
rise in real interest rates, enforcement of tighter norms on Bank NPAs and
implementation of the Indian Bankruptcy Code, decline in GFCF and other factors.
Despite the promising growth trajectory that Indian economy has been
experiencing and is believed to experience, there remain several challenges that
need to be addressed to ensure welfare and development along with the sustained
growth. These include:
2.5.2.1 Non-farm Employment Opportunities
Over the years, the rural non-farm sector has been gaining importance in providing
gainful employment and additional income opportunities to the growing rural
workforce. Yet the country is still struggling to move rural workers away from
agriculture. More than 70 per cent of the rural poor are dependent on agriculture
either as cultivators or as agriculture labour. Besides, livestock rearing is again a
key livelihood of the poor. Thus, it becomes imperative to make rural non-farm
activities lucrative enough to attract the growing rural workforce. For this,
analysing the barriers of entry into this sector employment and the different
activities undertaken in each state or region becomes important.
2.5.2.2 Demographic Transition and Dividend
According to United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), demographic dividend
means, “the economic growth potential that can result from shifts in a population’s
age structure, mainly when the share of the working-age population (15 to 64) is
larger than the non-working-age share of the population (14 and younger, and 65
and older)”.India has the largest proportion of young people in the world. The
working-age population (15–64 years) constitutes 64 per cent of the population.
The country has a distinctive 20 to 25 years’ window of opportunity which needs
to be exploited. Considering the fact the country’s IT industry employs just
0.4 per cent of the workforce– with the vast majority of Indians doing low


--- Page 51 ---
50
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview
productivity jobs in areas such as transportation or construction– development
of a labour-intensive manufacturing sector becomes vital for the country to take
advantage of its rapidly growing population.
2.5.2.3 Urbanisation
India is urbanising at a much faster pace. As per World Urbanisation Prospect
2014, Revision report India is projected to add 404 million urban dwellers between
2014-2050. This will add additional pressure to the existing urban centres which
are already in the grip of issues like house shortages, traffic congestion, air
pollution, rising greenhouse gas emissions, poor public health, etc. resulting from
tremendous  demographic  pressure,  inadequate infrastructure and resources to
cater, unplanned growth of  the peri-urban  sprawls characterise.  Urbanisation
in India is inevitable thus, the  need for solving the  various problems associated
with it  requires  a  combination  of  actions, starting  with  increased investment;
strengthening the  framework  for  governance,  and most  importantly  capacity
building  for  the  people  and  the institutions engage in urban affairs. Along with
this, the country needs to avoid excessive sprawl and address infrastructure
bottlenecks, particularly in the transport, power and water sectors.
2.5.2.4 Poverty and Inequality
Poverty elimination has remained a major challenge right from independence
and lies at the core of India’s national development agenda to create a just and
equitable society.
 Po
verty has always been a matter of concern in the Indian
economy. A significant part of the country and the population is deprived of
access to basic health care, food, drinking water, sanitation as well as financial
services, making the minimum standard of living out of their reach, largely due
to long years of centralised development and inequitable distribution of income.
Poverty is worsened by the relatively high level of income inequality. Hence,
there has always remained the need of an attempt to eliminate poverty.
2.5.2.5 Environment and Climate Change
India is both a major greenhouse gas emitter and one of the most vulnerable
countries in the world to projected climate change. The country is already
experiencing changes in climate and the impacts of climate change, including
water stress, heat waves and drought, severe storms and flooding, and associated
negative consequences on health and livelihoods. With a 1.3 billion but growing
population and dependence on agriculture, India probably will be severely
impacted by continuing climate change. This calls for innovations, new
technologies, and new approaches to economic development.
2.5.2.6 Infrastructure
India’s ambition of sustaining its relatively high growth depends on one important
factor: infrastructure. The country, however, is plagued with weak infrastructure
incapable of meeting the needs of a growing economy and growing population.
The corporate growth and investments can also be hampered if the government
fails to close the infrastructure deficit, which some experts estimate costs 4-5 per
cent of GDP due to inefficiencies. Also in order to fulfil Sustainable Development
Goal number 9, India needs to develop quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient
infrastructure, including regional and trans-border infrastructure to support
