--- Page 109 ---
108
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview UNIT 5 PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL
INFRASTRUCTURE
Structure
5.0 Objectives
5.1 Infrastructure in India
5.1.1 Meaning and Significance
5.1.2 Nature of Infrastructure
5.1.3 Types of Infrastructure
5.1.4 Infrastructure and Economic Growth
5.1.5 Role of Public Private Partnership in Infrastructure
5.1.6 Budget Allocations for Infrastructure Sector
5.1.7 Social and Physical Infrastructure
5.2 Privatisation and Commercialisation of Infrastructure
5.2.1 Need for Privatisation and Commercialisation
5.2.2 Prerequisites for Private Investment
5.3 Physical Infrastructure: Growth and Policy Issues
5.3.1 Transport
5.3.1.1 Road
5.3.1.2 Railways
5.3.1.3 Shipping and Ports
5.3.1.4 Aviation
5.3.2 Telecommunications
5.3.3 Power
5.3.4 Banking
5.3.5 Housing and Urban Infrastructure
5.4 Social Infrastructure: Growth and Policy Issues
5.4.1 Education
5.4.2 Health
5.5 Infrastructure: Challenges and Way Ahead
5.6 Let Us Sum Up
5.7 Key Words
5.8 References
5.9 Answers or Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises
5.0 OBJECTIVES
After reading this unit, you will be able to:
state the need for infrastructural development in India;
distinguish between physical and social infrastructure sector;
explain why both physical and social infrastructure are crucial for  India’s
growth;
identify the issues requiring policy attention arising out of India’s economic
growth; and


--- Page 110 ---
109
Physical and Social
Infrastructure
 pinpoint the issues crucial in infrastructure policy in the Indian economy.
5.1 INFRASTRUCTURE IN INDIA
In Economic literature, infrastructure is popular by the name “Overhead Capital”
or “Social Overhead Capital”. The famous economist A.O Hirschman stated that
Social Overhead capital is the “basic services without which primary, secondary
and tertiary productive activities cannot function”. Importance of infrastructure
in facilitating economic and social activity cannot be under-emphasised.
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 9 aims to “Develop quality, reliable,
sustainable and resilient infrastructure, including regional and trans-border
infrastructure, to support economic development and human well-being, with a
focus on affordable and equitable access for all”.
This unit focuses on both the physical and social infrastructure sector; its
importance in the economic growth, recent trends and government policies
towards infrastructural development and challenges faced by the sector.
5.1.1 Meaning and Significance
Infrastructure means those basic services and support systems that facilitate
different economic activities, thereby helping in the development of a country.
Infrastructure comprises of activities such as (i) transport, (ii) communications,
(iii) energy, (iv) aspects related to economic activity that contribute to increase
in productivity of natural resources, such as irrigation, drainage, afforestation,
etc., (vi) science and technology, (vii) information system, (viii) finance and
banking, (ix) civic amenities like piped water supply, sanitation and sewerage,
solid waste collection and disposal, and piped gas, and (x) human resource services
like education and health. Core Infrastructure incorporates all the main types of
infrastructure, for instance, roads, highways, railways,
 pu
blic transportation,
water, and gas supply, etc. Core assets provide essential services and have
monopolistic characteristics.
 I
t is useful to view infrastructure as physical
infrastructure like roads or bridges and the infrastructure services like
transportation, in this case. Most infrastructure services and part of physical
infrastructure are non-tradable, and therefore their availability cannot be readily
augmented through imports. They need to be domestically produced. Investors
seeking to invest in core infrastructure look for five different characteristics:
income, low volatility of returns, diversification, inflation protection, and long-
term liability matching.
5.1.2 Nature of Infrastructure
The infrastructure sector has certain peculiarities that help us to distinguish this
sector from other sectors of the economy. Among these, the more important
distinguishing features can be identified as follows:
i) Public Goods: Most of the physical infrastructure services have some
elements of public good in them. These services are available to the public;
the consumers may be charged for these services or the same may be supplied
free. But even when they are supplied against a price, it is not always possible
to exclude those consumers who chose not to pay for them.
ii) Externalities: The social benefit of the infrastructure services far exceeds
the cost involved in their generation. This, in turn, creates problems in pricing


--- Page 111 ---
110
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview
of these services. It makes it difficult to price them in order to recover the
cost fully.
iii) Monopolies: Due to the inherent nature of infrastructure services, it is difficult
for more than one supplier to exist in one location. It thus creates the
possibility for monopolies and their regulation.
iv) Public Sector Domination: The existence of externalities particularly in the
field of social welfare has resulted in a dominant position by public sector
in production and supply of infrastructure services.
v) Lumpy Investment: Infrastructure prospects, more generally, require lump
sum investment, i.e., any expenditure on a part of the project is not useful
until the whole project is ready for operations. A half-way road or a rail line
are of no use. Similarly, investment in energy is useful only when the whole
system of generation, distribution and its reach to the ultimate consumer is
ready.
vi) Indivisibilities: Lump-sum investment, in turn, is the result of indivisibilities,
a characteristic feature of most infrastructure projects. One cannot divide
and sub-divide such projects in small parts and activate them. These are
indivisible.
Infrastructural facilities are very necessary and vital for the smooth functioning
of the economy. According to Dr V . K. R. V . Rao, “The link between infrastructure
and development is not a once for all affair. It is a continuous process and progress
in development has to be preceded, accompanied and followed by progress in
infrastructure; if we are to fulfil our declared objectives of a self-accelerating
process of economic development”.
5.1.3 Types of Infrastructure
Infrastructure can be put into several different types including:
Soft infrastructure: These types of infrastructure make up institutions that
help maintain the economy. These usually require
 human 
capital
 an
d help
deliver certain services to the population.
 Ex
amples include the healthcare
system,
 financi
al institutions, governmental systems, law enforcement, and
education systems.  S
oft infrastructure  r
efers to all the institutions that
maintain the  
economic,
 
health,
 
social, and
 
cultural standards  
of a
country.  
This includes  e
ducational programmes,  
official statistics,
parks
 
and 
recreational
 
 facilities,
 
law enforcement
 ag
encies, and
 emer
gency
services.
Hard Infrastructure: These make up the physical systems necessary to
run a modern, industrialised nation. Examples include roads, highways,
bridges, as well as the capital/assets needed to make them operational (transit
buses, vehicles, oil rigs/refineries).
 
 T
he assets constituting the hard
infrastructure support multiple services that are important intermediaries in
the production process. Thus, roads support transportation services that are
important to move inputs and outputs of a production process.
Critical Infrastructure: These are assets defined by a government as being
essential to the functioning of a society and economy, such as facilities for
shelter and heating, telecommunication, public health, agriculture, or civic
amenities, etc.
