--- Page 130 ---
129
Physical and Social
Infrastructure
include: urban air and water pollution resulting in global warming and climate
change; exorbitant levels of urban solid waste, inadequate urban transport.
Policy Initiatives
The urbanisation in India is inevitable thus, the need for solving the various
problems associated with it requires a combination of actions, starting with
increased investment; strengthening the framework for governance, and most
importantly capacity building for the people and the institutions engage in urban
affairs.
Recognising the vast impact that Urbanisation has on the environment, the Indian
government committed its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC)
to United Nation Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 2015.
The INDC centres around India’s policies and programmes on promotion of clean
energy, resilient urban centres, promotion of waste to wealth, safe, smart and
sustainable green transportation network, abatement of pollution and efforts to
fight the build-up of carbon by enhancing the carbon sink through creation of
forest and tree cover.
The government of India has launched various programmes to address urban
governance issues and gaps in infrastructure. Some of the key programmes include
the Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT), Heritage
City Development and Augmentation Yojana (HRIDAY), Smart Cities Mission,
Clean India Mission and R-Urban Mission.
The Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2016 (RERA): The RERA
is one of the significant reforms implemented in the real estate sector with an
objective to ensure regulation and promote real estate sector in an efficient and
transparent manner and to protect the interest of home buyers.
The Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana- Urban (PMAY-U)– which envisions ‘Housing
for All-Urban’, was launched in June, 2015 to provide pucca house with basic
amenities to all eligible urban poor by 2022.
The country is participating in the United Nations’ “New Urban Agenda”, which
aims to make cities more networked, closer to their citizens and more sustainable
in the future. In the “Housing for all” project, the government aims to provide
affordable housing even for the poorest – a total of 20 million houses in more
than 2,500 cities. And with the “Smart Cities Mission”, more than 100 urban
spaces are to be transformed into digitally networked conurbations.
5.4 SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE: GROWTH AND
POLICY ISSUES
5.4.1 Education
India holds an important place in the global education industry. By 2030, India is
set to have the largest working age population in the world. Not only do they
need literacy but they need both job and life skills. This provides a great
opportunity for the education sector. India’s educational system broadly comprises
school education (elementary, secondary and higher secondary), higher education
(general and professional) and vocational education. The Ministry of Human


--- Page 131 ---
130
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview
Resource Development (MHRD) is the nodal ministry for the sector. Expenditure
in education sector as percentage of GDP increased from 2.8 per cent in 2014-15
to 3.1 per cent in 2019-20. As per the data released by Department for Promotion
of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT), the total amount of Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI) inflow into the education sector in India stood at US$ 2.47
billion from April 2000 to March 2019.
India has seen a rapid expansion in the higher education sector since 2001. There
has been a dramatic rise in the number of higher education institutions (HEIs)
and enrolment has increased fourfold. The Indian higher education system is
now one of the largest in the world, with 993 Universities, 39931 Colleges and
10725 Stand Alone Institutions. Despite the increased access to higher education
in India, challenges remain. Low employability of graduates, poor quality of
teaching, weak governance, insufficient funding, and complex regulatory norms
continue to plague the sector. India’s gross enrolment ratio (GER) in 2018-19
was 26.3 per cent but still far from meeting the MHRD’s target of achieving 50
per cent GER by 2035.
Government Initiatives
Indian educational policy and reforms emphasised on overcoming challenges to
improve low enrolment ratio in higher education, low quality of teaching and
learning, constraints on research capacity and innovation, uneven growth and
access to learning opportunities, etc. Some of the major initiatives taken by the
Government of India are:
SWAYAM (Study Webs of Active learning for Young Aspiring Minds)– a
programme initiated by Government of India and designed to achieve the
three cardinal principles of Education Policy viz., access, equity and quality.
The National Digital library of India (NDLI)– a project initiated under the
National Mission on Education through Information and Communication
Technology (NMEICT) to develop a virtual repository of learning resources
with a single-window search facility.
The Mission of Unnat Bharat Abhiyan to leverage the intellectual capital of
higher educational institutions for the upliftment of rural India.
The Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya National Mission on Teachers and
Teaching (PMMMNMTT) to address issues related to teachers and teaching.
Prime Minister Research Fellows (PMRF) scheme to support 1000 bright
undergraduate students every year, for direct admission in the research
programmes in the reputed institutions like IISc, IITs.
The National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) adopted by the
MHRD to rank institutions of higher education in India.
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan – a Centrally Sponsored Scheme in partnership with
State Governments for universalising elementary education across the
country.
National Education Policy 2020: The National Education Policy (NEP),
2020 – approved by the Union Cabinet on 29th July 2020 to make way for
large scale, transformational reforms in both school and higher education
sectors – is built on the foundational pillars of Access, Equity, Quality,


--- Page 132 ---
131
Physical and Social
Infrastructure
Affordability and Accountability. Key highlights of the policy include:
- Ensuring Universal Access at all levels of school education;
- Early Childhood Care and Education with new Curricular and
Pedagogical Structure;
- Reforms in school curricula and pedagogy;
- Emphasis on promoting multilingualism and Indian languages;
- Assessment reforms;
- Equitable and inclusive education;
- Robust and transparent processes for recruitment of teachers and merit-
based performance;
- Exposure of vocational education in school and higher education system;
- Increasing GER in higher education to 50 per cent by 2035;
- Holistic Multidisciplinary Education with multiple entry/exit options;
- Expansion of open and distance learning to increase GER.
- The Centre and the States to work together to increase the public
investment in Education sector to reach 6 per cent of GDP at the earliest.
In pursuance with the Prime Minister’s vision for ‘Transforming India’,
Ministry of Human Resource Development took a leap forward in
transforming education sector with the motto of “Education for All, Quality
Education”. MHRD has launched—
(i) Pradhan Mantri Innovative Learning Program– DHRUV; (ii) NISHTHA–
National Initiative for School Heads’ and Teachers’ Holistic Advancement;
(iii) Integrated Online junction for School Education ‘Shagun’; (iv) a five-
year vision plan named Education Quality Upgradation and Inclusion
Programme (EQUIP); (v) Several new schemes in Higher Education
Department to boost research and Innovation culture in the country.
Degree level full-fledged online education programme started to provide
quality education to students of deprived sections of the society as well as
those who do not have access to higher education. Through this initiative
Gross Enrolment Ratio will be increased.
Looking ahead
In 2030, it is estimated that India’s higher education will adopt transformative
and innovative approaches and will emerge as a single largest provider of global
talent, with one in four graduates in the world being a product of the Indian
higher education system.
5.4.2 Health
Depending on the level of care required, healthcare in India is broadly classified
into three types. This classification includes primary care (provided at primary
health centres), secondary care (provided at district hospitals), and tertiary care
institutions (provided at specialised hospitals like AIIMS).  Primary health care
infrastructure provides the first level of contact between health professionals
and the population. Broadly, based on the population served and the type of
