--- Page 112 ---
111
Physical and Social
Infrastructure5.1.4 Infrastructure and Economic Growth
Infrastructural facilities are vital for the smooth functioning of the economy.
They are like wheels of development without which the economy will not be
able to function properly. Provision of adequate infrastructure, both in terms of
quantity and quality, is essential for sustenance of economic growth. They
contribute to improvement in factor productivity and by providing amenities
that enhance the quality of life.
 T
he role of infrastructure development in economic
growth has been well recognised in the literature. Discussed below are some of
the most critical significance of economic infrastructure and its impact on the
economy.
1) Productivity and Growth: Better quantity and quality of infrastructure can
directly raise the productivity of human and physical capital and hence
growth (e.g. by providing access, roads can: (i) improve education and
markets for farmers’ outputs and others by cutting costs, (ii) facilitate private
investment, (iii) improve jobs and income levels for many). Studies reveal
that 1 per cent growth in the stock of infrastructure often associates with
1 per cent growth in per capita GDP.
2) Contributes to Domestic Market Development: Infrastructural development
also contributes to domestic market development. Rural roads in the
developing countries have a major effect in improving marketing
opportunities and reducing transaction costs. The marketing of agricultural
commodities can account for 25-60 per cent of final prices of food stuffs in
developing countries. About half of the marketing costs are attributable to
transport. Thus, proper infrastructure can reduce the cost of marketing which
in turn contributes to domestic market development.
3) Infrastructure mobilises Savings (Domestic and Foreign).  Infrastructure
development typically involves high levels of upfront financial investment,
given the heavy capital expenditure required during the construction stage.
Thus, mobilising savings for infrastructure development becomes
indispensable. In the globalised era infrastructure facilities plays an important
role in attracting foreign capital. Foreign direct investment as well as portfolio
investment flows to those countries where adequate infrastructure facilities
are available.
4) Infrastructure Generates Employment Opportunities: Infrastructure is a base
for larger investment, development of industry and agriculture which in
turn creates more employment opportunities. Infrastructure improves
mobility, productivity and efficiency of labour.
5) Infrastructure and Social Development:  Infrastructure increases the
employment opportunities which increase the income level of the people
further enhancing the standard of living of the people. Thus, infrastructure
development will change the total outlook of the society and will lead to
social development.
6) Assists to Reduce Poverty: Creation of infrastructure helps to reduce poverty
by improving the quality of life. Access to clean water and sanitation has
direct consumption benefits in reducing mortality and morbidity that
increases the productive capacity of the poor. Access to transport can


--- Page 113 ---
112
Indian Economic Development:
An Overview
contribute to higher and more stable incomes enabling the poor to manage
risk. Transport infrastructure has been found to expand opportunities for
non-farm employment in rural areas. Improved rural transport can also ease
the introduction of improved farming practices by lowering the costs of
modern inputs.
7) Promotes Social Change: Infrastructural facilities also act as an instrument
of social change. Development of industries, transport facilities and education
changes the outlook of people. Apart from these, even science, technology
and growth of towns and cities will lead to a changed economic outlook.
8) Infrastructure and National Defence: Infrastructure development in terms
of proper transport and communication facilities, adequate facilities for
research and development, proper military schools etc. increase the strength
of the nation from defence perspective.
5.1.5 Role of Public Private Partnership in Infrastructure
Infrastructure may be owned and managed by  g overnments  or  by private
companies, such as a  
public utility  
or
 
railway 
companies. Traditionally most
roads, major airports and other ports, water distribution systems, and sewage
networks have been publicly owned, but this is changing as now one finds  many
energy and
 teleco
mmunications networks
 ar
e privately owned, so are airports,
roads and civic infrastructure. Government-owned and operated infrastructure
may be developed and operated in the
 pr
ivate sector  or
 in
 publ
ic-private
partnerships. Besides supplementing the public resources, public-private
partnerships (PPPs) enable the public sector to benefit from private sector technical
expertise, experience and efficiency, and transfer project-related risks to the private
sector. In infrastructure, PPPs have helped addressing financial gaps. However,
the actual performance of infrastructure sector PPPs has been mixed. While a
few sectors like roads and highways and airports have been able to attract
significant private investments, most others like ports, water treatment and
recycling, health and education have seen limited traction. Over the last decade,
the share of private investments in the sector fell from 37 per cent in 2008 to
about 25 per cent in 2018. A number of important steps have been initiated by
the government to provide a boost to infrastructure PPPs over last few years.
One of the most significant has been the setting up of the National Investment
and Infrastructure Fund (NIIF), with the government contributing around
Rs. 20,000 crore. A number of policy-related measures aimed at improving
liquidity in infrastructure investments have also been taken such as announcement
of Infrastructure Investment Trust guidelines by SEBI in September 2015,
promulgation of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 and the November,
2018 directive by SEBI to large corporates to fund at least 25 per cent of their
borrowings through the corporate bond market with effect from Financial Year
(FY) 19-20.
While these initiatives are steps in the right direction, there are a few other areas
which need to be addressed on a priority basis given the global experience in
public private partnerships. Firstly, there is a need to consolidate and update the
existing PPP guidelines based on the experience gained across individual sectors
over the last few years as well as best practices in other countries. Secondly,
need to formulate an enabling framework to renegotiate concession
agreements.
 F
inally, there is an urgent need for a dispute-resolution process for


--- Page 114 ---
113
Physical and Social
Infrastructure
Public Private Partnership (PPP) arrangements, as long-pending disputes have
significantly adverse financial impact and act as a deterrent for private partners.
5.1.6 Budget Allocations for Infrastructure Sector
The social and economic transformation of society depends on availability of
inclusive and sustainable infrastructure amenities to the people and the ability of
the economy to address its infrastructure bottlenecks. In the past decade (FY
2008-17), India invested about $1.1 trillion on infrastructure. The challenge is to
step-up annual infrastructure investment so that lack of infrastructure does not
become a binding constraint on the growth of the Indian economy.
 I
n order to
reach the GDP target of $5 trillion by 2024-25, India needs to spend about $1.4
trillion (Rs. 100 lakh crore) over these years on infrastructure, including social
and economic infrastructure projects. To achieve this objective, a Task Force
was constituted to draw up the National Infrastructure Pipeline (NIP) for each of
the years from FY 2019-20 to FY 2024-25. NIP is set to enable a forward outlook
on infrastructure projects which will create jobs, improve ease of living, and
provide equitable access to infrastructure for all, thereby making growth more
inclusive. As per the detailed reports of the task force, total project capital
expenditure in infrastructure sectors in India during the fiscals 2020 to 2025 is
projected at over
 Rs. 102 lakh cro
re, around 70 per cent of this is amounted by
sectors such as Energy (24%), Roads (19%), Urban (16%), and Railways (13%).
5.1.7 Social and Physical Infrastructure
A country’s level of human and economic development is closely related to its
levels of achievement in physical and social infrastructure. While physical
infrastructure is an important determinant of domestic production, good social
infrastructure is vital for human development as well as economic progress
through better educated, better skilled, and healthier citizens, or citizens with
better human capabilities.
Social infrastructure
 
S
ocial infrastructure
 r
efer to basic services such as  h
ealth, education, skill
formation
 and training
 that contribute to human resource development and its
quality. It also includes sanitation, drinking water, housing, sewerage, etc. Social
infrastructures are also termed as social overheads. These social overheads
indirectly support the economic systems as they contribute to productivity
improvements. Besides meeting some social objectives, the social infrastructure
supports growth in the long run. For example, consuming education services
does not directly affect economic activities like production and distribution of
goods, but indirectly helps in the economic development of the country by
producing the skill and knowledge sets in the form of scientists, technologists
and engineers, who contribute to economic activity.
 S
ocial infrastructure
enhances
 soci
al
 wel
l-being and furthers economic growth by providing basic
services and facilities which allow businesses to develop and flourish.
Trends in Social Sector Expenditure
As per Economic Survey 2020-21, the expenditure on social services (education,
health and other social sectors) by the Centre and States combined as a proportion
of GDP increased from 6.2 to 8.8 per cent during the period 2014-15 to 2020-21
(BE). This increase was witnessed across all social sectors. For education, it
increased from 2.8 per cent in 2014-15 to 3.5 per cent and for health, from 1.2
per cent to 1.5 per cent during the same period. Refer Table 5.1.
