--- Page 1 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Block 
 
 
 
QUANTITATIVE METHODS-I 
UNIT 9 
Two Variable Regression Models         5 
UNIT 10 
Multivariable Regression Models 37 
UNIT 11 
Measures of Inequality 59     
UNIT 12 
Construction of Composite Index in Social Sciences 93  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MEC-109
Research Methods 
in EconomicsIndira Gandhi  
National Open University 
School of Social Sciences 
3 


--- Page 2 ---
Expert Committee 
 
Prof. D.N. Reddy     Prof. Romar Korea 
Rtd. Professor of Economics    Professor of Economics 
University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad   University of Mumbai, Mumbai 
 
Prof. Harishankar Asthana    Dr. Manish Gupta   
Professor of Psychology    Sr. Economist 
Banaras Hindu University    National Institute of Public Finance and Policy 
Varanasi      New Delhi 
 
Prof. Chandan Mukherjee    Prof. Anjila Gupta    
Professor and Dean     Professor of Economics 
School of Development Studies   IGNOU, New Delhi   
Ambedkar University, New Delhi   
 
Prof. V.R. Panchmukhi    Prof. Narayan Prasad (Convenor) 
Rtd. Professor of Economics    Professor of Economics 
Bombay University and Former   IGNOU 
Chairman ICSSR, New Delhi    New Delhi 
 
Prof. Achal Kumar Gaur    Prof. K. Barik   
Professor of Economics    Professor of Economics 
Faculty of Social Sciences    IGNOU  
Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi   New Delhi 
 
Prof. P.K. Chaubey     Dr. B.S. Prakash    
Professor, Indian Institute of    Associate Professor in Economics  
Public Administration, New Delhi   IGNOU, New Delhi 
 
Shri S.S. Suryanarayana    Shri Saugato Sen  
Former Joint Advisor    Associate Professor in Economics 
Planning Commission, New Delhi   IGNOU, New Delhi 
Course Coordinator and Editor: Prof. Narayan Prasad 
Block Preparation Team 
 
Unit Resource Person     IGNOU Faculty   
      (Format, Language and Content Editing) 
 
9 Dr. Anoop Chatterjee   Prof. Narayan Prasad   
 
Associate Professor in Economics  Professor of Economics   
 ARSD College (University of Delhi), Delhi IGNOU, New Delhi 
 
10 Shri B.S. Bagla    Prof. Narayan Prasad 
 
Associate Professor in Economics  Professor of Economics 
 PGDAV College (University of Delhi), Delhi IGNOU, New Delhi 
 
11 Prof P.K. Chaubey    Prof. Narayan Prasad 
 IIPA, New Delhi    Professor of Economics, IGNOU, New Delhi 
 
12 Dr. Sunil K Mishra    Prof. Narayan Prasad 
 
Fellow, Institute for Human Development Professor of Economics, IGNOU, New Delhi 
 New Delhi 
 
Print Production 
Mr. Manjit Singh 
Section Officer (Pub.) 
SOSS, IGNOU, New Delhi 
October, 2015 
© Indira Gandhi National Open University, 2015 
ISBN-978-81-266- 
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced in any form, by mimeograph or any other 
means, without permission in writing from the Indira Gandhi National Open University. 
Further information on Indira Gandhi National Open University courses may be obtained from the 
University's office at Maidan Garhi. New Delhi-110 068. 
Printed and published on behalf of the Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi by the 
Director, School of Social Sciences. 
Laser Typeset by : Tessa Media & Computers, C-206, A.F.E.-II, Okhla, New Delhi 
Printed at : 
 


--- Page 3 ---
BLOCK 3 QUANTITATIVE METHODS-I 
Economic theory is basically concerned about economic laws. These laws (or 
hypotheses) are qualitative statements on the economic behaviour of various 
agents both at the micro and macro levels. The validity of such qualitative 
statements, however, depends upon their rigorous empirical verification by 
means of the available data. 
The implicit argument between the economic theory and its empirical 
verification is that if the stated laws holds good in the real world situation, it 
should be reflected in the displayed pattern of the relevant data. The 
identification and the examination of such patterns are conducted by employing 
various statistical techniques. The primary statistical tool employed for such a 
purpose is the Regression Modeling. Hence, a thorough knowledge of 
Regression Models is absolutely essential for conducting any serious research 
in Applied Economics. 
An economic law or theory essentially postulates some relationship that exist 
among the economic variables. Suppose the relationship between two variables 
Q and P (i.e. Quantity and Price) is expressed in the form (say linear form) 
/g1843 /g3404 /g2009 /g3397 /g2010/g1842. Such an expression amount to an exact linear relationship which 
is hard to find in reality. Usually, various non-deterministic factors (called 
random factors) affect such a relationship. Therefore, in order to allow for the 
effect of such random factors, a random component is incorporated into the 
model i.e. /g1843 /g3404 /g2009 /g3397 /g2010/g1842 /g3397 /g1847, where /g1847 is a random variable. With this, the strict 
mathematical relationship expressed before becomes statistical in character. 
Regression technique can now be applied to estimate the two parameters /g2009 and 
/g2010 by using the actual data. This is the crux of a Two Variable Regression 
Model explained in Unit 9. 
Unit 10 explains the multiple regression models by including more than two 
independent random variables. The same procedure as done in the case of two 
variable regression models is applied to examine whether the estimated 
parameters correspond to the postulated relationship. The treatment accorded to 
the Two Variable Regression Models and the Multiple Regression Models in 
this course is first limited to the ordinary least square (OLS) method 
subsequently, another method viz., the maximum likelihood method (MLM) is 
also explained. The two methods taken together equip a researcher with the 
basic tools for undertaking empirical research. 
Improvement in well being of the poor has been one of the important goals of 
economic policy and to a significant extent it is determined by the growth and 
distribution of its income. Distribution patterns have an important bearing on 
the relationship between average income and poverty levels. Extreme 
inequalities are economically wasteful. Further, income inequalities also 
interact with other life-chance inequalities. Hence reducing inequalities has 
become priority of public policy. Unit 11 deals with the conceptual and 
measurement aspects of income inequality.  
The complex social and economic issues like child deprivation, food security, 
human development, human wellbeing etc. are difficult to measure in terms of 
single variable. They are expression of several indicators. Composite Index is 
an important statistical techniques to express the single value of several 
interdependent or independent variables. Hence, Unit 12 throws light on 
various methods to construct Composite Index. 


--- Page 4 ---
 
 
1 
5 
Two Variable Regression 
ModelsUNIT 9 TWO VARIABLE REGRESSION 
MODELS 
Structure 
9.0 Objectives 
9.1 Introduction 
9.2 The Issue of Linearity  
9.3 The Non-deterministic Nature of Regression Model 
9.4 Population Regression Function 
9.5 Sample Regression Function 
9.6 Estimation of Sample Regression Function 
9.7 Goodness of Fit 
9.8 Functional Forms of Regression Model 
9.9 Classical Normal Regression Model 
9.10 Hypothesis Testing 
9.11 Let Us Sum Up 
9.12 Exercises 
9.13 Key Words 
9.14 Some Useful Books 
9.15 Answers or Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
9.16 Answers or Hints to Exercises 
9.0 OBJECTIVES 
After reading this unit, you will be able to: 
• know  the issue of linearity in regression model; 
• appreciate the probabilistic nature of the regression model; 
• distinguish between the population regression model and the sample 
regression model; 
• state the assumptions of the classical regression model; 
• estimate the unknown population regression parameters with the help of the 
sample information; 
• explain the concept of goodness of fit; 
• use various functional forms in the estimation of the regression model; 
• state the role of classical normal regression model; and 
• conduct some tests of hypotheses regarding the unknown population 
regression parameters. 
 


--- Page 5 ---
 
 
Quantitative Methods-1 
6 
Two Variable Regression 
9.1  INTRODUCTION 
The empirical research in economics is concerned with the statistical analysis 
of economic relations. Often these relations are expressed in the form of 
regression equations involving the dependent variable and the independent 
variables. The formulation of an economic relation in the form of a regression 
equation is called a regression model in econometrics. In such kind of a 
regression model, the variable under study is assumed to be a function of 
certain explanatory variables. The major purpose of a regression model is the 
estimation of its parameters. In addition, it is also useful for testing hypotheses 
and making certain forecasts. However, our concern will be mainly with the 
estimation of parameters and testing of some hypotheses. At this stage, we 
shall refrain from discussing the issue of forecasts from a regression model. A 
regression model that contains one explanatory variable is called a two variable 
regression model. In this unit, we shall focus on a two variable regression 
model. It may be mentioned here that we are essentially focusing on what is 
known as the two variable classical regression model. 
9.2 THE ISSUE OF LINEARITY 
When we talk about a regression model; at our level, what we have in our mind 
is a linear regression model. It is important to have a clear idea about the 
concept of linearity in the context of a regression model. 
Suppose, we have a regression equation like, 
X Yβα +=  
Generally, we call this a linear regression equation. By linearity we often mean 
a relationship, in which, the dependent variable is a linear function of the 
independent variable. In this case, the graphical representation of the regression 
equation is a straight line. However, there can be another interpretation of 
linearity. Consider the following regression equation, 
2X X Yγ β α+ + =  
Now, this regression equation is linear in parameter, in the sense that the 
highest power of any parameter (constant) is one. But this equation is non-
linear in variable because the highest power of the independent variable is two. 
In fact, conventionally speaking, it is a quadratic regression equation. In this 
way, we can have any number of polynomial regression equations with the 
highest power of the independent variable going up to any positive integer. 
And all these equations may be linear in parameter. 
But consider this regression equation, 
XY 2
β α+ =  
This regression equation is linear in variable, but non-linear in parameter 
because the power of β  is two. 
We should note now that from the point of view of regression analysis, we 
shall consider only those models which are linear in parameter, no matter 
whether they are linear in variable or not. After all, the main purpose of a 
regression model is the estimation of its parameters. These parameters 
have to be linear for the purpose of their straightforward estimation, say, 


--- Page 6 ---
 
 
1 
7 
Two Variable Regression 
Models
by least square method. For example, the parameters of the second regression 
equation presented above, can be easily estimated by a simple extension of the 
least square method that we have studied in Unit 8. It should be mentioned here 
that there are some regression equations that are non-linear in parameters. By 
applying suitable transformations they can be reduced to linear in parameter 
regression equations. We may consider the following regression equation 
βαX Y=   
This regression equation in its present form is non-linear in parameter. 
However, by applying log transformation, we obtain the following equation 
XY
βα  log   log   log+=  
It can be clearly seen that the equation has now been transformed into one that 
is linear in the log of parameters. We can easily estimate log values of these 
parameters by using the usual least square method and then obtain the 
estimated values of the original parameters by applying the antilog procedure. 
However, some times, the regression equations can be of non-linear in 
parameter type that no transformation can render them to a linear in parameter 
form. Such equations should be the basis of non-linear or intrinsically non-
regression models. There is no direct method available for the estimation of the 
parameters of this kind of regression models and they are generally estimated 
by following some standard iteration procedure. Any discussion on such 
iteration procedure, however, is beyond the scope of the present unit. 
9.3 THE NON-DETERMINISTIC NATURE OF THE 
REGRESSION MODEL 
We have already referred to the statistical nature of the regression equation in 
the last unit. By the very nature of social science, we cannot expect the 
relationships that may exist among different variables to be exact or 
deterministic. There is always some random element involved in them. As a 
result, for a particular value of the independent variable X, the value of the 
dependent variable Y cannot be exactly determined from such a relationship. 
Let us consider the example of a consumption function. Here, for a given level 
of income, when we try to identify the corresponding level of consumption, in 
all probability, we shall not be able to obtain a definite value of consumption; 
instead, a host of values will be available. And this will be the case with all 
possible levels of income. The diagram below shows this. 
 
Fig. 9.1: Bi-Variate Population 
 
Income 
Consumption


--- Page 7 ---
 
 
Quantitative Methods-1 
8 
Two Variable Regression Thus, the dependent variable Y tends to be probabilistic or stochastic in nature. 
In fact, for each value of the independent variable X, there will be a distribution 
of the values of the dependent variable Y. Accordingly; we specify the 
regression model by incorporating a random or stochastic variable. As 
mentioned in the previous unit, it should be clear that in our formulation the 
dependent variable is stochastic but the independent or explanatory variables 
are non-stochastic in nature. We should point out here that at an advanced 
treatment of the regression model, even the explanatory variables are 
considered to be stochastic in nature. It is the element of randomness either in 
the dependent variable alone or both in the dependent and independent 
variables, that make the regression model non-deterministic in nature. 
9.4 POPULATION REGRESSION FUNCTION  
The first step in the regression model is the conceptualization of a population 
regression function. Let us assume that there is a bi-variate population of (X, Y) 
of size N. Suppose, in this population, Y is the dependent variable and X is the 
independent variable. Let X and Y be related to each in a linear fashion in the 
following way: 
U X Y++= βα  
The above equation is called the population regression function. Here, βα  and   
are the unknown parameters. It is clear from our discussion on linearity that 
this function is linear in variable as well as in parameter. 
In this population regression function, the variable U deserves some attention. 
We have already mentioned that in social Science, there cannot be an exact 
relationship and it is at the most statistical in nature. In our formulation, in fact, 
Y is stochastic or random, but X is non-stochastic or deterministic in nature. 
Consequently, a random variable like U is introduced in the population 
regression function to incorporate this element of randomness of a statistical 
relationship. The random variable U is also called the disturbance term. It is a 
sort of catch – all variables that represent all kinds of indeterminacies of an 
inexact relationship. Thus it may represent, for example, 
a) Inherent randomness in human behaviour : The unpredictability of human 
psyche is also reflected in the human behaviour. As a result, even after 
taking into account of all possible factors, a regression equation cannot 
fully explain the value of the dependent variable for the given values of all 
possible explanatory variables. 
b)  Effect of omitted variables : Sometimes for the sake of parsimony, all the 
explanatory variables are not included in a regression model. The 
disturbance term can be taken as a representative variable of all such 
omitted variables. 
c) Effect of measurement error : Sometimes, it is not possible to measure the 
values of the dependent variable accurately. Consequently, the disturbance 
term is introduced in the regression model to represent the combined effect 
of all such possible sources of measurement error. 
d) Error in the formulation: Often, the functional form of the regression 
model proves to be far from a correct depiction of the underlying 
relationship between the dependent variable and the independent variables. 


--- Page 8 ---
 
 
1 
9 
Two Variable Regression 
Models
We incorporate the disturbance term to correct the distortions that may 
arise from a wrong specification of the regression model. 
We should note that apart from the above-mentioned factors, there might be 
other unidentifiable factors that might also be influencing the dependent 
variable in an unknown manner. We introduce the disturbance term for 
incorporating the effect of all such unknown random factors. It should be clear 
that for some of the reasons mentioned above the disturbance term may assume 
a positive value and for some other factor it may tend to be negative. 
Consequently, for all practical purposes, the net or the mean effect of the 
random disturbance can be taken to be zero. 
Difference between the Disturbance Term and the Intercept 
There is a difference between the interpretation of the disturbance term and that 
of the intercept term α in our regression equation. As we have noted, that the 
disturbance represents the random effects of the known and unknown variables 
that have not been included in the regression model. The intercept term, on the 
other hand, stands for all such variables, that are known to have some definite 
non-random effects on the dependent variable. For example, in the demand 
function, if we just formulate a two variable regression equation between the 
quantity demanded and the price instead of a multiple regression equation, then 
we are consciously not including variables like prices of other commodities and 
the income of the consumer. And all these variables affect the quantity 
demanded in a known fashion. So, the intercept term here represents the 
average effect of all such known factors that are not explicitly included in the 
model. 
It should be clear now that it is the disturbance term that makes the relationship 
statistical in nature and renders the entire procedure so rich in content. 
Population Regression Line 
The main objective of the regression analysis is to obtain the value of the 
dependent variable for a given value of the independent variable. This can be 
attempted by running a regression on the population regression function 
U X Y++= βα , i.e., by fitting a regression line through the population cluster 
shown in Figure 9.1. Obviously, the value of Y that we shall obtain from such a 
population regression line will be an average value. In other words, we shall 
get the equation for the population regression line by applying the expectation 
to the population regression function, U X Y
++= βα . Thus, the population 
regression equation will be given by 
XX Y E βα +=) / (         
It may be mentioned here that while applying the expectation operator, E (U) 
can be taken as zero because, as we have discussed above, the mean effect of U 
tends to be zero. 
Sometimes we call the above expression, the population regression line and 
loosely write it as 
X Yβα +=  
In this expression, however, we should be clear that Y stands for the conditional 
mean of Y for a given X. 


--- Page 9 ---
 
 
Quantitative Methods-1 
10 
Two Variable Regression Assumptions of the Classical Regression Model 
As we have mentioned earlier, the population regression model 
U X Y++= βα  is unknown in the sense that that the numerical values of its 
parameters are not known. As a result, we are not in a position to find the value 
taken by Y on an average for a given value of X. This means that we have to 
estimate these parameters from sample information. We already know that a 
very simple and popular method of estimation is the least square procedure. 
However, we should ensure that these least square estimates faithfully 
represent the unknown population parameters, otherwise, the whole purpose is 
defeated. This is possible only if the disturbance term U satisfies some 
assumptions. These assumptions along with two other that we have already 
mentioned about, are known as the assumptions of the classical regression 
model. The assumptions are: 
1) The disturbance term U has a zero mean for all the values of X, i.e., E (U) = 0. 
2) Variance of U is constant for all the values of X, i.e., 2) (
σ=X V . It may be 
mentioned here that this assumption is known as the assumption of 
homoscedasticity in the econometric literature. 
3) The disturbance terms for two different values of X are independent i.e., 
j iU Uj i ≠ =for  , 0 ) , cov(. 
4) X is non-stochastic. 
5) The model is linear in parameter. 
The assumption of non-stochasticity of X leads to a corollary. It is, X and U are 
independent i.e., 0 ) , cov(=U X . 
9.5 SAMPLE REGRESSION FUNCTION 
To put the whole discussion in the proper perspective; we have an unknown bi-
variate population. The only information that we have is some randomly 
selected values of Y from this population that correspond to some fixed values 
of X. Suppose, in this way we have n pairs of values of X and Y. So, we can say 
that we have a random sample of size n. Our purpose is to estimate the 
parameters of this unknown population from our sample information so that we 
can have a reasonable estimate of an average value of Y for a given value of X 
that is valid for the entire population. In other words, our objective is to 
estimate the population regression function from the sample observations. We 
can proceed in that direction by discussing the concept of a sample regression 
function. The form of the sample regression function is quite similar to that of 
the population regression function. It can be presented as 
U X Yˆ
ˆˆˆ + + =β α     
In the above expression, UY ˆ and  ˆ,ˆ,ˆ β α  should be interpreted as the sample 
estimators for their respective unknown population counterparts. Thus, we are 
hypothesizing that corresponding to the linear population regression function 
U X Y++= βα , there is a linear sample regression function U X Yˆˆˆˆ + + =β α . 
Our purpose is now to estimate the population regression function from the 
sample regression function. It means that we have to estimate αˆ  and βˆ  from 
the given sample and take them as the estimates for the unknown population 
