--- Page 85 ---
 
 
Quantitative Methods-I 
86 
Measures of Inequality
11.9 SOME USEFUL BOOKS 
Chaubey, P. K. (2004), Inequality: Issues and Indices , Kanishka Publishers, 
Distributors, Delhi. 
Cowell, Frank A. (1995), Measuring Inequality , Prentice Hall/Harvester 
Wheatsheaf, London; 
Sen, A.K. (1997) On Economic Inequality , Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
(with Annexe by James E. Foster. 
11.10  ANSWERS OR HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) Range is the difference between the maximum and minimum value. With 
a view to ensuring that the index of inequality based on this measure of 
dispersion is unit-free and/or is confined in the interval of (0,1), various 
ways of normalizations could be considered. See Sub-section 11.2.1. 
2) In the relative range only extreme values are considered, which may not 
be representatives of the distribution. It is like comparing the poorest 
(who may be a few) with the richest (who may be one). Inter-quartile 
measures take into account the middlemost distribution with 50 percent 
recipients. See Sub-section 11.2.2 
3) In the mean deviation, all values in a way are considered. The mean of 
absolute deviations is divided by the mean of the distribution to yield 
relative mean deviation. See Sub-section 11.2.3. Since the sum of 
deviations on one side of the mean will not change with the transfer of 
income contemplated, the magnitude of the index would not change. 
4) See Sub-section 11.2.4. In one version the deviations are taken with 
respect to logarithm of geometric mean and in the other with respect to 
that of arithmetic mean. With some mathematical manipulation, one can 
find out that former is smaller than the latter by square of the difference 
between the logarithms of geometric mean and arithmetic mean.  
5) It is a straight application of the fact that geometric mean of a distribution 
is smaller than its arithmetic mean. Of course, when the values are greater 
than 1! 
6) Hirfindahl index is sum of squares of the shares with each recipient, 
which of course varies with the number of recipients. Equal distribution 
of shares between two recipients will yield a value of 0.5 and between 
three recipients, 0.333. It is therefore more used as a measure of 
concentration. See Sub-section 11.2.5.  
7) The message is that one can try on one’s own to devise new methods. See 
Sub-section 11.2.6. For second part, the answer is 5/9. Try it out. 
 Check Your Progress 2 
1) Gini ratio is one half of the average value of absolute differences between 
all pairs, including with self, of values divided by the arithmetic mean. 


--- Page 86 ---
 
 87
I Measures of InequalitySee the definition by Kendall and Stuart in Sub-section 11.3.1. Have a 
look at expression (g.4) and (G.7). 
2) The basic difference lies Gini index from other measures based on 
dispersion that in articulating all differences are considered while in others 
either few differences are considered or deviations from arithmetic/ 
geometric means are considered. 
3) See Sub-section 11.3.2. 
4) By writing out in a table, columns for class intervals or values, 
frequencies, class total values, cumulative frequencies, cumulative total 
values, cumulative proportions and cumulative shares in respect of each 
class. For using expression (LG.5), consecutive moving differences (or 
sums) of proportions and consecutive moving sums (or differences) need 
to be computed in two additional columns. MS-Excel will do well. 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) Look at the Fig. 11.4 and Sub-section 11.4.2. Try writing the properties in 
language. 
2) When the two Lorenz curve will intersect, it will not be possible to say on 
balance which distribution is more unequal. In fact, one section in that 
case will be more unequal and the other section less unequal in 
distribution 1 in comparison to their counterparts in the distribution 2. 
3) The value of Gini coefficient is equal to twice the areas inscribed between 
line of equality and the Lorenz curve. It is equivalent to saying that G is 
equal to (1-A) where A is the areas below Lorenz curve in the unit box.  
4) Kakwani’s measure of inequality is normalized length of the Lorenz curve. 
Check Your Progress 4 
1) Dalton’s social welfare function is a simple aggregation of welfare (utility) 
functions of the individuals constituting the society. In addition, all 
individuals are supposed to have the same income utility function. 
2) Sub-section 11.5.1. Write Dalton’s proposal and its modern version. Also 
point out that though conceived in terms of utility, Dalton held that the 
index has to be measured in terms of income only. 
3) An inequality measure should not change with linear transformation of 
personal utility function. Since Dalton’s index does not respect this 
property, Atkinson is not happy. He therefore devises a new artifact called 
‘equally distributed equivalent income’ and suggests a new utility function 
called iso-elastic marginal utility function. 
4) Sen index is different from the Atkinson’s index in one respect that he opts 
for a social welfare function, which has as individual incomes its arguments 
and is symmetric and quasi-concave. See Sub-section 11.5.3. 
5) See Sub-section 11.5.5. 


--- Page 87 ---
 
 
Quantitative Methods-I 
88 
Measures of Inequality
Appendix 
AXIOMS OF INEQUALITY MEASURES 
For any statistical measure, some of the desirable properties that are described 
in standard textbooks are (i) simplicity of comprehension, (ii) ease of 
computation, (iii) range of variation, and (iv) amount of information needed.  
However, we discuss below only those properties, which are peculiar to the 
measures of economic inequality. 
We are often faced with situations where we have to compare two distributions 
with the help of an index with regard to their level of inequality.  The two 
distributions may belong to two different countries at a point of time, to a 
country at two points of time, or to two situations—say, one before tax and the 
other after tax or before and after interpersonal transfers etc.  
People have set up some intuitively appealing properties in order to judge the 
efficacy of an inequality index. The first set of properties was given as 
‘principles’ by Dalton (1920).  Today, in literature, they are known as axioms.  
We propose to discuss some common axioms.  It may be pointed out at the 
outset that these axioms almost ignore the question whether inequality is an 
issue, which matters more (or less) in an affluent society or in a poor one. The 
whole discussion will assume that all incomes are positive though we know for 
sure in case of business failure or crop failure, incomes can well be negative or 
zero. 
1) Axiom of Scale Independence 
If there are two distributions of equal size such (N) that each element of one 
distribution is a multiple θ of the corresponding element of the other 
distribution, i.e., 
1
1
2
1 x xθ=                       i=1,2,…,N, 
then the numerical magnitudes of inequalities of both the distributions should 
be the same, i.e., 
) ,..., , ( ) ,..., , (2 2
2
2
1
1 1
2
1
1 NN x x x I x x x I=  
w
here the inequality measure I is shown as a function of the distribution   
 
Obviously, it also satisfies the idea that the level of inequality should not 
change when the scale of measurement changes, say, from rupees to paise or 
bushels to quintals.   
It does also mean that equal proportionate additions to all incomes would not 
change the level of inequality for 
xxi θλ =+ ) 1 ( i  i =1,2,….,N, 
The proportionate addition could even be negative.  Thus, it is a question of 
shares in the cake, not the size of the cake.  It is very obvious that an inequality 
). ...., , (, 2 1 Nx x x


--- Page 88 ---
 
 89
I Measures of Inequalitymeasure is defined in terms of shares si because a proportionate change in all 
incomes leaves the shares unchanged. 
However, this axiom goes against Dalton’s principle of proportionate additions 
to income, which stated that equal proportionate additions (subtractions) should 
diminish (increase) the level of inequality. Perhaps, Dalton could not see that, 
equal proportionate addition is theoretically, equivalent to change in the scale 
of measurement. It should so happen in the case of a measure of relative 
dispersion is obvious enough. 
The axiom covers the cases of proportionate taxation/subsidies.  It may be 
noted that such additions do not change individual (class) shares of total 
income and, therefore, the Lorenz curve remains unchanged. All measures 
based on the Lorenz curve shall therefore satisfy this axiom. 
It should not mean that change in the size of cake is immaterial.  In the social 
welfare, size of cake and distribution of cake both matter.  It is only in a limited 
context of measurement of inequality that this property is considered desirable.  
Lorenz (1997) mentions an objection raised against this axiom in terms of non-
proportionate increase in well-being of different income holders, which means 
diffusion of well-being when incomes increase but concentration when 
incomes decrease. Thus, this idea existed much before Dalton mentioned it.  
One could easily see that this objection incorporates the idea of diminishing 
marginal utility. The true province of the axiom then is the unit of 
measurement. 
2) Axiom of Population Size Independence 
The level of inequality remains unaffected if a proportionate number of persons 
is added to each income level. 
This suggests that the magnitude of inequality in the distribution of the cake 
should depend on the relative number of receivers with different levels of 
income.  If we merge two economies of identical distributions of the same size 
N, then, in the consequent economy of size 2N, there shall be the same 
proportion of the merged population for any given income.  Such replications 
will leave the inequality level unchanged. The axiom is also known as the 
Principle of Population Replication. 
This exactly corresponds to Dalton’s principle of proportionate additions of 
persons.  Since the Lorenz curve remains unchanged so long as proportions of 
people in each class remains the same, the measures based on the Lorenz curve 
would satisfy this axiom. 
Let us have however a counter-intuitive example. Let us a have two-person 
world in which one person is having no income and the other having is having 
all. Let us replicate the economy.  Now there is a four-person world in which 
two are sharing destitution with zero income but the other two are sharing 
positive income equally. Earlier there was no equality; now each 50 per cent of 
population is sharing the income equally.  So, some scholars do not accept it. 
 
 


--- Page 89 ---
 
 
Quantitative Methods-I 
90 
Measures of Inequality3) Axiom of Equal Income Addition 
If the distribution 2 2
ix , i=1,2,….,N is obtained by addition of equal amount d 
(say, through pension) to each element of  distribution 1 1
ix ,  i= 1,2,…N, i.e., 
d x xi i + =1 2  
t
hen inequality level of distribution 2 should be lower than that of distribution 1 
i.e., 
) ,..., , (2 2
2
2
1 Nx x x I< ) , .... , (1 1
2
1
1 Nx x x I 
n
aturally, subtractions (say, taxation) of equal amount from each income would 
reverse the inequality sign.  It can be noted that in the former situation, the 
shares of the poorer persons increase and in the latter, they decrease. This 
axiom exactly corresponds to Dalton’s principle of equal additions to incomes. 
Now, we propose to discuss two very important axioms relating to transfer of 
an income from a person to another when other things remain the same.  The 
former may be called Pigou-Dalton condition and the latter, Sen condition. 
4) First Axiom of Income Transfer (Pigou-Dalton Condition) 
If an equal transfer from a richer person to a poorer person takes place, then the 
level of inequality is strictly diminished, provided that the equalizing transfer 
amount is not more than the difference between two incomes involved. Any 
number of such transfers taking place between any two consecutive income 
units will not cause any change in the ranking of income units and therefore 
such a process of transfers may be called the rank-preserving equalization.  
This axiom requires an inequality measure to be sensitive to transfers at all 
levels of income and, thus, at least a function of all incomes. 
This axiom corresponds to Dalton’s principle of income transfer.  Dalton 
(1920) argued that an inequality measure must have this minimal property. 
Since in this context Pigou’s contribution (1912) is found significant, Sen 
(1973) designated this axiom as Pigou-Dalton condition.  Following him, a 
number of contributors in the field have given it the name of ‘P-D condition’. 
Most of the indices, barring relative range and relative mean deviation, pass 
this test.  This axiom is also known as weak transfer axiom because it suggests 
the direction but not the magnitude of change in the level of inequality. 
5) Second Axiom of Income Transfer (Sen Condition) 
If we consider two transfers, one at a time, at different points of scale, then the 
transfer at lower end of scale should have greater impact than its counterpart at 
higher end of the scale.  According to Sen, (1973), the impact on the index 
should be greater if the transfer takes place from a person with an income level 
of, say Rs.1000 to someone with Rs.900 than a similar transfer from a man 
with Rs.1000100 to someone with Rs.1000000. 
We may see many measures do not satisfy any of the two conditions of transfer 
and some satisfy only the first one. Those that satisfy the second transfer axiom 
automatically satisfy the first transfer axiom. 


--- Page 90 ---
 
 91
I Measures of Inequality6) Axiom of Symmetry 
If distribution ) ,..., , (2 1
p
N
p p x x x were a permutation of distribution ) ,..., , (2 1 Nx x x,  
then the inequality level of both the distributions would be the same. 
This implies that if two persons interchange their income positions, inequality 
measure does not change. Thus the axiom ensures impartiality between 
individuals for non-income characteristics: The evaluator does not distinguish 
between Amar, Akabar and Anthony; nor between Shiela and Peter; or between 
Mr. Pygmy and Ms. Dwarfy.  Further, it means that the inequality depends only 
on the frequency distribution of incomes. 
7) Axiom of Interval 
The inequality measure should lie in the closed interval of (0,1). 
The measure is supposed to assume the value of zero when all incomes are 
equal, which means when all persons have equal income and the value of unity 
when only one individual gets all the income (and other have zero incomes, not 
negative incomes). 
Most people tend to agree with the axiom.  A few, notably Theil (1967) and 
Cowell (1995), disagree.  They hold that the situation of one person grabbing 
all the income in a society of 2 persons cannot be described by the same level 
of inequality as that of one person doing so in a society of 2 crore persons.  It 
would not be easy to assert that in the case of 2-person society the level of 
inequality is unity when one person has all the income and the other has none. 
In one case, 50 percent population is having positive income, in the other only 
0.00000005 percent. Some people therefore qualify the axiom by saying that 
when one person gets all the income the measure approaches unity in the limit 
as the number increases. 
When a measure has a finite maximum, it is easy to transform such an index 
into the one, which has maximum value 1. Most measures, though not all, have 
zero as their minimum value. But question that Cowell (1995) raises is that 
there are many ways in which the measure could be transformed so that it lies 
in the zero-to-one range but each transformation has different cardinal 
properties. 
8) Axiom of Decomposability 
Suppose population can be sub-divided into several groups and an over-all 
index of inequality was a function of group-wise indexes and if the population 
mean can be expressed as weighted average of group means, the population 
index of inequality can be regarded as decomposable. The groups might be 
defined as comprising of people in different occupations, residents of different 
areas, with different religious or educational backgrounds etc.  
However we find a lot of overlapping in these groups. This leads sum of the 
weights to differ from unity.  
Not all indices are found to be decomposable. Gini coefficient, a very popular 
measure is decomposable only if the constituent groups are non-overlapping. 
Cowell (1995) has conducted a beautiful experiment. First, he computes four 
inequality measures for two distributions of same size and same mean-each 
divided into two groups of equal size in a manner that there is no overlapping: 


--- Page 91 ---
 
 
Quantitative Methods-I 
92 
Measures of InequalityPopulation A: (60,70,80), (30,30,130) 
Population B: (60,60,90), (10,60,120) 
Now, it is found that the group means and population means in two 
distributions are the same and group inequalities in B are higher than their 
counterparts in A. But when we compute overall inequalities, one of the 
measures suggests that the magnitude of inequality in B is lower than that in A.  
And the measure used is Gini, which is very popular among economists. As he 
says, ‘strange but true’.  If the component inequality magnitudes are higher and 
the weights are the same, how could overall measure be lower? It is therefore 
impossible to express overall inequality (change) as some consistent function 
of inequality change in the consisted groups. 
These are all intuitively appealing axioms. There does remain scope for 
formulating other axioms.  In the literature on poverty measurement one finds a 
plethora of axioms developed by a number of contributors working in that 
areas. But we shall be content with these only. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 92 ---
 
 93
I Measures of Inequality 
