--- Page 41 ---
 
 
 
284 
Extensions of 
Regression Models   The probit model is another nonlinear regression model where the 
dependent variable is a binary variable. 
 The coefficients in the probit model can be interpreted as the change in 
the probability of the dependent variable for a one-unit change in the 
independent variable. 
 The probit model is like the logit model, but it assumes that the error term 
follows a normal distribution instead of a logistic distribution. 
15.8 KEY WORDS 
Binary 
Model 
: A binary model is a statistical model that predicts a 
categorical dependent variable with two possible outcomes. 
The dependent variable is typically coded as a binary 
variable, such as 0 or 1, or ‘yes’ or ‘no’. The independent 
variables can be continuous or categorical. 
Qualitative 
Dependent 
Variable 
: A qualitative dependent variable is a variable that can take 
on one of a limited number of categories, such as yes or no, 
high or low, or agree or disagree. It is a type of categorical 
variable. The qualitative variable is not continuous.  
Dichotomous 
Variables 
: A dichotomous variable is a variable that can only take on 
two values, such as "yes" or "no, " "true" or "false, " or 
"male" or "female." Dichotomous variables are often used 
in surveys and experiments, where the goal is to understand 
the relationship between two or more variables. 
Odds Ratio : It is calculated by dividing the odds of occurrence of an 
event by the odds of the event occurring in another group. 
Odds ratios are always positive. Odds ratios can be greater 
than 1 or less than 1. An odds ratio of 1 indicates no 
association between the two variables. An odds ratio 
greater than 1 indicates that the event is more likely to 
occur in the first group than in the second group. An odds 
ratio less than 1 indicates that the event is less likely to 
occur in the first group than in the second group. 
Marginal 
Effect 
: Marginal effects are calculated at a specific point  in the 
data. The point at which the marginal effect is calculated is 
called the base point. Marginal effects can be positive or 
negative. A positive marginal effect indicates that an 
increase in the independent variable is associated with an 
increase in the dependent variable. A negative marginal 
effect indicates that an increase in the independent variable 
is associated with a decrease in the dependent variable. 
Marginal effects can be interpreted in different ways 
depending on the context. For example, a marginal effect of 


--- Page 42 ---
 
 
 
285 
Pressure Groups 0.10 in a logistic regression model may be interpreted as a 
10% increase in the probability of the event occurring.  
15.9 SOME USEFUL BOOKS 
Baltagi. Badi H. (2008), Econometrics, Fourth Edition, Springer-Verlag Berlin 
Heidelberg. 
Berndt, Ernst R. (1991), The Practice of Econometrics: Classic and 
Contemporary, Addison-Wesley. 
Cameron, Colin and Pravin Trivedi (2005), Microeconometrics, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University. 
Maddala, G. S. (1983), Limited Dependent and Qualitative Variables in 
Econometrics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Verbeek, Marno (2017), ‘A Guide to Modern Econometrics ,’ Fifth Edition, John 
Wiley and Sons Ltd.  
Wooldrige, Jeffrey (2022), Introductory Econometrics, Seventh Edition, Cengage 
Learning  
15.10 ANSWERS / HINTS TO CHECK 
YOURPROGRESS EXERCISES 
Check Your Progress 1 
1)     (a) Since all t-values (coefficient divided by standard error) are greater than 
2, all the coefficients are statistically significant at 5 per cent level of 
significance. 
(b)  The intercept term gives the “probability” that a female person (since 
Di= 0 for female) with zero income will own a house. This value is 
negative. Since probability cannot be negative, we may treat this value 
as zero. 
(c)  The slope value of 0.0017 means that for a unit change in income, on 
average, the probability of owning a house increases by 0.0017 or 
about 0. 17 percent. Of course, given a particular level of income, we 
can estimate the actual probability of owning a house. If, for example, 
income = Rs. 500, the estimated probability of owning a house is 
  
(d)  The coefficient of variable 𝐷௜ is 0.008. It implies that for a male (when 
𝐷௜ = 1), the intercept increases by 0.008. Therefore, the probability of 
owning a house for males is greater than that for females by 0.8 
percent. 


--- Page 43 ---
 
 
 
286 
Extensions of 
Regression Models  
2)  Go through Section 15.2.2. You have to summarise the points given there 
and answer.  
Check Your Progress 2 
1)  The log of odds-ratio is given by 𝐿௜ = ln ቀ
௣ ೔
ଵି௣ ೔
ቁ = 𝛼଴ + 𝛼ଵ 𝑋௜ + 𝑢௜. 
2)  You can interpret the results of the logit model through its Logit, Odds-
ratio and marginal effect. See Sub-Section 15.3.2. 
3) Go through Sub-Section 15.3.2 and answer.  
Check Your Progress 3 
1) Go through Section 15.4 and answer. 
2) Go through Section 15.6 and answer. 
 
 


--- Page 44 ---
 
287
UNIT 16 INTRODUCTION TO 
SIMULTANEOUS EQUATIONS 
MODELS* 
Structure 
16.0 Objectives 
16.1 Introduction 
16.2 Some Examples of Simultaneous Equations Models 
16.3  Endogenous Variables and Exogenous Variables  
16.4 Simultaneity Bias  
 16.4.1 Endogeneity Problem 
 16.4.2 The OLS Estimator is Biased 
 16.4.3 The OLS Estimator is not Consistent 
16.4.4  Solution to Simultaneity Bias 
16.5 Structural Form and Reduced Form  
16.6 Concept of Identification 
 16.6.1 Paradox of Identification 
  16.6.2 Identification Status of an Equation 
16.7 Identification Conditions 
 16.7.1 Order Condition of Identification 
 16.7.1 Rank Condition of Identification 
16.8 Let Us Sum Up 
16.9 Key Words 
16.10 Some Useful Books/References 
16.11 Answers/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
16.12 Practice Questions 
16.0  OBJECTIVES 
After going this Unit, you will be able to 
 analyse the nature of simultaneous relationship between variables; 
 distinguish between endogenous variables and pre-determined variables; 
 explain the concept of simultaneity bias and its implications; 
 examine the identification status of an equation in a simultaneous 
equations system; and 
 applythe order and rank conditions for identification of an equation. 
                                                
*Adapted from Units 13 and 14 of IGNOU SLM, MECE 001: Econometric Methods, written 
by Prof. Biswajit Nag and Ms. Satavisha Mukherjee, Indian Institute of Foreign Trade (IIFT), 
New Delhi 


--- Page 45 ---
 
 
Extensions of Regression 
Models 
288 
16.1  INTRODUCTION 
The econometric models we studied so far talk about single equation 
regression models where a dependent variable is related to a set of 
independent or explanatory variables. In all these regression models, 𝑦 is the 
‘dependent’ or ‘explained’ variable and 𝑥ଵ , 𝑥ଶ , … are the ‘independent’ or 
‘explanatory’ variables. Thus 𝑦 depends upon 𝑥, but the reverse is not true. In 
real life, however, we normally find variables that are dependent on each 
other. In this sort of relationship, the equilibrium values of the variables can 
be determined by considering the simultaneity in relationship.  
In simultaneous relationships a single equation under investigation is part of a 
wider phenomenon. In such cases the variables can be explained with the help 
of a system of equations. Let us take an example. At the macro level, as you 
know from macroeconomics course, aggregate consumption expenditure 
depends upon aggregate disposable income. Aggregate disposable income, on 
the other hand, depends upon the national income and taxes imposed by the 
government. Moreover, national income is dependent on aggregate 
consumption expenditure of the economy. Thus, estimation of a single 
equation between aggregate consumption and disposable income will not 
provide us with consistent and unbiased estimators.  
16.2 SOME EXAMPLES OF SIMULTANEOUS 
EQUATIONS MODELS  
In regression models one of the crucial assumptions is that the exogenous 
variables 𝑥’s are independent of the error term 𝑢 (see Unit 4). This 
assumption is violated in simultaneous relationships. Let us illustrate this 
through the demand and supply model. 
We can write the demand function as 
𝑞 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑝 + 𝑢       …(16.1) 
where 𝑞 represents the quantity demanded, 𝑝 the price, and 𝑢 the stochastic 
error term, representing random shifts in the demand function.  
From microeconomic theory we know that the equilibrium price and quantity 
are determined in the market by intersection of supply and demand curves 
(see Fig. 16.1). Therefore, we cannot determine equilibrium price by solving 
the demand equation independently. Again, if there is a random shift in the 
demand curve we see that it will affect both equilibrium price and quantity 
(considering the normal slope of supply curve as in panel-a of Fig. 16.1). In 
case the supply curve is vertical, then a shift in the demand curve affects 
equilibrium price only (see panel-b of Fig. 16.1). Again, if the supply curve is 
horizontal, a shift the demand curve affects equilibrium quantity only keeping 
the level of equilibrium price unchanged (see panel-c of Fig. 16.1). Thus we 
see that demand curve alone cannot determine the equilibrium price and 


--- Page 46 ---
 
 
Introduction to Simultaneous 
Equations Models
289
quantity. Moreover, the slope of the supply curve influences the relationship 
between price and quantity. If we consider the demand equation only, the 
slope of the supply curve gets included in the term ‘ 𝑢’. The inclusion of the 
slope of supply curve in the error term leads to correlation between price and 
error term, which violates one of the basic assumptions of OLS, that is, 
𝑐𝑜𝑣( 𝑋𝑢) = 0.So, if we ignore the supply curve and estimate the demand 
equation (16.1) by OLS, then it will produce inconsistent estimates of the 
parameters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
Fig. 16.1: Interaction between Supply and Demand Curves 
The problem is that in the demand-supply model we cannot consider the 
demand function in isolation when we study the relationship between quantity 
and price as in equation (16.1).The solution is to bring the supply function 
into picture; and estimate the demand function and the supply function 
together. Such models are known as simultaneous equations models. 
An econometric model is based on certain theoretical concepts. Thus, the 
simultaneous equations model (SEM) can be best understood by some 
practical examples. Here we present three examples of SEM. 
Example 16.1 
Wage-Price Model 
The model of money wage and price determination is a good example of 
SEM. According to the model wage rate is determined by unemployment rate 
in the economy and the rate of price change (that is, inflation) in an 
unrestricted labour market (reflected in equation (16.2)). The rate of inflation, 
on the other hand, is a function of the change in wage rate and money supply 
q 
p 
S 
S D1 
D2 
D1 
D2 
Supply curve sloping upward 
q 
p 
S S 
D1 
D2 
D1 
D2 
Supply curve horizontal 
q 
p S 
S 
D1 
D2 
D1 
D2 
Supply curve sloping upward 
(a) (b) 
(c) 
 


--- Page 47 ---
 
 
Extensions of Regression 
Models 
290 
(reflected in equation (16.3)). The model consists of the two equations as 
follows: 
 𝑊௧ = 𝛼଴ + 𝛼ଵ 𝑈௧ + 𝛼ଶ 𝑃ଵ + 𝑢ଵ௧  …(16.2) 
 𝑃௧ = 𝛽଴ + 𝛽ଵ 𝑊௧ + 𝛽ଶ 𝑅ଵ + 𝛽ଷ 𝑀௧ + 𝑢ଶ௧  …(16.3) 
where  𝑊 =  rate of change in money wage 
𝑈 =  unemployment rate in percentage 
 𝑃 =  rate of change in prices  
 𝑅 =  rate of change in cost of capital  
 𝑀 =  supply of money  
 𝑡 =  time 
 𝑢ଵ , 𝑢ଶ  =  stochastic disturbances 
As the price variable 𝑃enters the wage equation (16.2) and the wage variable 
𝑊 enters the price equation (16.3), both the two variables are inter-dependent. 
Moreover, the explanatory variables𝑃 in (16.2) and 𝑊 in (16.3) are stochastic 
in nature. Recall that in OLS it is assumed that the explanatory variables are 
not stochastic. Therefore, these stochastic explanatory variables are 
expectedly correlated with the stochastic disturbance terms. This correlation 
violates the assumption of OLS that error term is independent of independent 
variable. Thus, the classical OLS method is not applicable for estimation of 
the parameters of the two equations individually. 
Example 16.2 
Keynesian Model of Income Determination 
Let us consider the simple Keynesian model of income determination: 
Consumption function𝐶௧ = 𝛽଴ + 𝛽ଵ 𝑌௧ + 𝑢௧ 0 < 𝛽ଵ < 1 … (16.4) 
Income identity: 𝑌௧ = 𝐶௧ + 𝐼௧(= 𝑆௧) … (16.5) 
where  𝐶 = consumption expenditure 
 𝑌=  income 
 𝐼 =  Investment (assumed to be exogenous) 
 𝑆 =  Savings  
 𝑡 =  time 
 𝑢  =  stochastic disturbance term 
𝛽଴and𝛽ଵ are parameters. 


--- Page 48 ---
 
 
Introduction to Simultaneous 
Equations Models
291
The parameter 𝛽ଵ represents the marginal propensity to consume (MPC). 
From macroeconomic theory we know that 𝛽ଵ  is expected to remain between 
0 and 1.Equation (16.4) is the consumption function which shows that 
consumption consists of two parts: autonomous consumption expenditure ( 𝛽଴ ) 
and income induced consumption ( 𝛽ଵ 𝑌). Equation (16.5) is the national 
income identity, signifying that total income is equal to total consumption 
expenditure plus total investment expenditure. 
From the consumption function (16.4) we find that 𝐶 and Y are 
interdependent and that𝑌௧ is not expected to be independent of the disturbance 
term, 𝑢௧. When 𝑢௧ changes (because of a variety of factors included in the 
error term) the consumption function shifts, which, in turn affects 𝑌௧. 
Therefore, once again the classical least-squares method is not applicable to 
(16.4). If applied, the estimators thus obtained will be inconsistent. 
Example 16.3  
Macroeconomic Model 
The celebrated IS model, or goods market equilibriummodel of 
macroeconomics (see Unit 3 of MEC-102) in its non-stochastic form can be 
expressed as 
Consumption function: 𝐶௧ = 𝛽଴ + 𝛽ଵ 𝑌ௗ௧  0 < 𝛽ଵ < 1 …(16.6) 
Tax function: 𝑇௧ = 𝛾଴ + 𝛾ଵ 𝑌௧ 0 < 𝛾ଵ < 1 …(16.7) 
Investment function: 𝐼௧ = 𝜃଴ + 𝜃ଵ 𝑟௧  …(16.8) 
Disposable income: 𝑌ௗ௧ = 𝑌௧ − 𝑇௧  …(16.9) 
Government expenditure: 𝐺௧ = 𝐺ሜ  …(16.10) 
National income identity: 𝑌௧ = 𝐶௧ + 𝐼௧ + 𝐺௧  …(16.11) 
where 𝑌 =  national income 
 𝐶 =  consumption spending 
 𝐼 =  plannedor desired net investment 
 𝐺 =  Given level of government expenditure 
 𝑇 =  taxes 
 𝑌ௗ  =  disposable income 
 𝑟 =  interest rate 
In order to solve the above equation system, we first substitute (16.7) into 
(16.9); and then the value of 𝑌ௗ௧ into (16.6). Subsequently, we put the resulting 


--- Page 49 ---
 
 
Extensions of Regression 
Models 
292 
equation for 𝐶, and equation (16.8) for 𝐼 and (16.10) for 𝐺 into (16.11). 
Consequently, we obtain 
𝑌௧ = [𝛽଴ + 𝛽ଵ (𝑌௧ − 𝑇௧)] + [𝜃଴ + 𝜃ଵ 𝑟௧] + 𝐺ሜ 
By re-arranging terms in the above equation, we obtain  
𝑌௧ = 𝜋଴ + 𝜋ଵ 𝑟௧       …(16.12) 
where   
𝜋଴ = 𝛽଴ − 𝛼଴ 𝛽ଵ + 𝑦଴ + 𝐺
1 − 𝛽ଵ (1 − 𝛼ଵ )  
and 
𝜋ଵ =
ଵ
ଵିఉ భ (ଵିఈ భ )   
Equation (16.12) is the equation of the IS curve, which provides the 
combinations of the interest rate and level of income such that the goods 
market is in equilibrium. 
What would happen if we were to estimate, say, the consumption function 
(16.6) in isolation?Could we obtain unbiased and/or consistent estimates of 
𝛽଴ and𝛽ଵ ?Such a result is unlikely because consumption depends on 
disposable income, which depends on national income Y.But Ydepends on 𝑟 
and 𝐺 as well as the other parameters entering in 𝜋ଵ . Therefore, unless we 
consider all these influences, a simple regression of C on 𝑌ௗ  is bound to give 
biased and/or inconsistent estimates of 𝛽଴and𝛽ଵ. 
16.3ENDOGENOUS VARIABLES AND 
EXOGENOUS VARIABLES 
There are two types of variables in simultaneous equations models: 
endogenous and pre-determined variables.  
(i) Endogenous Variables are determined jointly and interdependently 
within the model. The endogenous variables are determined by the 
exogenous variables. We use notation Y for endogenous variables.  
(ii) Predetermined Variables :Predetermined variables are of three types: (i) 
exogenous variables, (ii) lagged exogenous variables, and (iii) lagged 
endogenous variables. Exogenous variables are determined outside the 
equation system. In other words, these variables are given from outside. 
For example, in the production function of wheat, rainfall is an 
exogenous variable.  
Remember that exogenous variables determine endogenous variables, but 
endogenous variables do not determine exogenous variables.  


--- Page 50 ---
 
 
Introduction to Simultaneous 
Equations Models
293
In a simultaneous equationsmodel, we can include the lagged values of 
endogenous variables. For example, 𝐶௧ is current year consumption and is 
assumed to be an endogenous variable. Consumption in the previous time 
period ( 𝐶௧ିଵ ) is a lagged endogenous variable. Similarly, we can include 
lagged exogenous variables (for example, 𝑋௧ିଵ ) as an explanatory variable in 
an equation of the simultaneous equations system. 
Notations 
To facilitate our discussion, we introduce the following example:Let us 
consider a SEM with 𝑀 endogenous and 𝐾exogenous variables.The general 
𝑀 equations model in 𝑀 endogenous, or jointly dependent, variables may be 
written as Equation (16.13) which is a time dependent SEM: 
𝑌ଵ௧ = 𝛽ଵଶ 𝑌ଶ௧ + 𝛽ଵଷ 𝑌ଷ௧ +. . . +𝛽ଵெ 𝑌ெ௧ + 𝛾ଵଵ 𝑋ଵ௧ + 𝛾ଵଶ 𝑋ଶ௧ +. . . +𝛾ଵ௄ 𝑋௄௧ + 𝑢ଵ௧  
𝑌ଶ௧ = 𝛽ଶଵ 𝑌ଵ௧ + 𝛽ଶଷ 𝑌ଷ௧ +. . . +𝛽ଶெ 𝑌ெ௧ + 𝛾ଶଵ 𝑋ଵ௧ + 𝛾ଶଶ 𝑋ଶ௧ +. . . +𝛾ଶ௄ 𝑋௄௧ + 𝑢ଶ௧  
𝑌ଷ௧ = 𝛽ଷଵ 𝑌ଵ௧ + 𝛽ଶଷ 𝑌ଷ௧ +. . . +𝛽ଷெ 𝑌ெ௧ + 𝛾ଷଵ 𝑋ଵ௧ + 𝛾ଷଶ 𝑋ଶ௧ +. . . +𝛾ଷ௄ 𝑋௄௧ + 𝑢ଷ௧  
……………………………………..……………………………………….. 
𝑌ெ௧ = 𝛽ெଵ 𝑌ଵ௧ + 𝛽ெଶ 𝑌ଶ௧ + ⋯ + 𝛽ெ ,ெିଵ 𝑌ெିଵ ,௧ + 𝛾ெଵ 𝑋ଵ௧ + 𝛾ெଶ 𝑋ଶ௧ + ⋯
+ 𝛾ெ௄ 𝑋௄௧ + 𝑢ெ௧  
 ...(16.13) 
where 𝑌ଵ, 𝑌ଶ,…,𝑌ெ  are 𝑀 endogenousvariables 
𝑋ଵ , 𝑋ଶ,…,𝑋௄  are 𝐾 predetermined variables(one of these 𝑋 variables 
may take a value of unity to allow for the intercept term in each 
equation) 
 𝑢ଵ , 𝑢ଶ ,…,𝑢ெ  are 𝑀 stochastic disturbances 
 𝑡 =1, …, 𝑇areTotal number of observations 
 𝛽’s are coefficients of the endogenous variables 
 𝛾’s are coefficients of the predetermined variables 
As equation (16.13) shows, there are three types of variables: First, we have 
endogenous variables, whose values are determined within the model. 
Second, we have predetermined variables, whose values are determined 
outside the model. Third, we have the stochastic error terms. The endogenous 
variables are regarded as stochastic whereas the predetermined variables are 
non-stochastic in nature. 
In notations, 𝑋ଵ௧  is a current (present-time) exogenous variable, whereas 
𝑋ଵ (௧ିଵ ) is a lagged exogenous variable. Note that 𝑌(௧ିଵ ) is a lagged 


--- Page 51 ---
 
 
Extensions of Regression 
Models 
294 
endogenous variable with a lag of one time period. Since the value of 𝑌ଵ (௧ିଵ ) 
is known at the current time 𝑡, it is regarded as non-stochastic. Hence, it is 
considered as a predetermined variable 1. In short, current exogenous, lagged 
exogenous, and laggedendogenous variables are considered as predetermined, 
as their values are not determined by the model in the current time period. 
At this point a question may be taking shape in your mind, how do we 
construct econometric models? What are the variables that should be included 
in an equation? Two issues are very important. First, such questions are 
answered by economic theory. The variables in an econometric model are 
included based on certain economic theory. In some cases, which are not 
established theory yet, the equations depend upon the logic that the researcher 
puts forth. Thus, behind the inclusion of a variable in an equation, there is 
some logic. Second, it is up to the concepts of economic theory and the model 
builder to specify the variables that are endogenous and that are 
predetermined. Although non-economic variables (variables not determined 
by any economic theory), such as temperature and rainfall, are clearly 
exogenous or predetermined, the model building must be exercised with great 
care while classifying economic variables as endogenous or predetermined. 
One must be able to defend i) the classification of variables into endogenous 
and exogenous, and ii) inclusion of a particular variable in an equation. 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) Explain the meaning of each of the following terms: 
 Endogenous Variables. 
 Exogenous Variables 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………
.…..…………………………………………………………………….…
.………..…………………………………………………………….……
.………………..…………………………………………………………. 
2) Distinguish between pre-determined variable and exogenous variable. 
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
.…..…………………………………………………………………….…
.………..…………………………………………………………….……
.………..…………………………………………………………….…… 
3) Write the general form of a simultaneous equation model. 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
                                               
 
1It is assumed implicitly here that the stochastic disturbances, the 'u s, are serially 
uncorrelated. If this is not the case, 1tY will be correlated with the current period disturbance 
term tu .Hence, we cannot treat it as pre-determined. 
