--- Page 107 ---
201 
Foreign Direct 
Investment and Foreign 
Portfolio Investment 
23.12 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR FOREIGN 
PORTFOLIO INVESTMENT IN INDIA 
In this short section, we spell out some of the eligibility criteria to be 
considered a foreign portfolio investor. An individual must fulfil the 
following conditions to register as Foreign Portfolio Investor: 
 The applicant must be a non-resident Indian as per the Income Tax Act
1961. 
 The applicant must not be a citizen of a country that has been categorised
under the public statement of FATF.
 The applicant is eligible to invest in securities of other countries.
 For investing in securities, the applicant must be authorized to do so by
Memorandum of Association and Articles of Association Agreement.
 If the bank is the applicant, such a bank must belong to a nation whose
central bank must be a member of the Bank for International Settlements.
Check Your Progress 4 
1) Examine the numerous advantages of Foreign Portfolio Investment (FPI).
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……….…………………………………………………………………...
2) Examine the various constraints and drawbacks associated with Foreign
Portfolio Investment (FPI).
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……….…………………………………………………………………...
3) Describe the prerequisites for qualifying as a Foreign Portfolio Investor
(FPI).
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……….…………………………………………………………………...


--- Page 108 ---
202 
Operational Aspects 
of Financial Markets vestment and Foreign23.13  LET US SUM UP 
This unit was concerned with foreign investment. Two types of foreign 
investment are considered: foreign direct investment and foreign portfolio 
investment. The unit discussed the concept of each and also brought out the 
differences between the two. 
We saw that FDI is an important source of external private finance. The unit 
explained that  FDI is a way of integrating international economics as it 
creates and promotes stable and long-lasting links between economies. It 
offers the following major benefits to economies: a) promotes international 
trade through access to foreign markets, b) facilitates the transfer of 
technology between countries, c) leads to economic development, and d) 
creates job opportunities. The unit carefully explained the concept of FDI, 
You were familiarised with the methods of FDI like Greenfield investment, 
mergers and acquisitions joint ventures and subsidiary arrangements. The 
unit further described the types of FDI and spelt out the advantages and 
disadvantages of FDI. 
The unit then went on to discuss FPI. We saw that Foreign Portfolio 
Investment (FPI) is very important in modern economies that have 
sophisticated financial systems. FPI allows foreign parties to invest in 
financial assets and instruments in the host country. This has a positive 
bearing on the price of domestic assets. The unit explained the types of FPI 
and the difference between FDI and FPI. Following this the unit described the 
categories of FPI. The advantages and disadvantages of FPI were discussed. 
Finally, the unit discussed the eligibility criteria for FPI in India. 
23.14  KEY WORDS 
Automatic     : 
Route 
It refers to the entry route through which investment by a 
person resident outside India does not require the prior 
approval of the Reserve Bank of India or the Central 
Government. 
FPI  : Foreign Portfolio Investments (FPI) refer to investments 
that are made in securities and other financial assets 
issued in another country. 
Foreign  : 
Portfolio 
Investor 
Foreign Portfolio Investor’ (FPI) means a person 
who is 
registered by the provisions of the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India (Foreign Portfolio Investors) 
Regulations, 2019, as amended from time to time. 
Government : 
Route 
Government Route refers to the entry route through which 
investment by a person resident outside India requires 
prior Government approval and foreign investment 
received under this route shall be by the conditions 
stipulated by the Government in its approval. 


--- Page 109 ---
203 
Foreign Direct 
Investment and Foreign 
Portfolio Investment 
NSDL  : National Securities Depository Limited. It facilitates 
monitoring of overall foreign investment limits as well as 
sub-limits that apply to NRI and FPI. 
RBI  :  Reserve Bank of India. It plays an important role in 
regulating FDI in India. It provides for certain rules and 
regulations for FDI. 
SEBI  :  Securities Exchange Board of India. SEBI provides 
guidelines for investments made in securities and other 
financial assets issued in another country. 
NSDL  : National Securities Depository Limited. 
Foreign  : 
Portfolio 
Investor 
Foreign Portfolio 
Investor' (FPI) means a person 
registered by the provisions of the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India (Foreign Portfolio Investors) 
Regulations, 2019, as amended from time to time. 
Government : 
Route 
‘Government Route’ 
means the entry route through which 
investment by a person resident outside India requires 
prior Government approval and foreign investment 
received under this route shall be by the conditions 
stipulated by the Government in its approval. 
23.15  SOME USEFUL BOOKS 
1) Taxmann’s FEMA & FDI Ready Reckoner with Guide to Overseas
Investment, 18th Edition 2023
2) Foreign Direct Investment Statistics: How Countries Measure FDI
2001. (2003). United States: International Monetary Fund.
23.16 ANSWERS/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) Foreign direct investment (FDI) can be defined as an investment made
outside the home country where an investor resident in one country invests in
another country in a way that establishes a long interest in and a high degree
of influence over an enterprise.
2) Methods of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI): Greenfield Investment,
Mergers and Acquisitions (M&A), Joint Ventures, Subsidiary Companies.
3) Various types of FDI are: Horizontal FDI, Vertical FDI, Conglomerate FDI,
Platform FDI.


--- Page 110 ---
204 
Operational Aspects 
of Financial Markets vestment and Foreign
Check Your Progress 2 
1) Routes of FDI: Automatic Route, Government Route
2) Advantages of FDI: FDI contributes significantly to the economic
growth of the host country, FDI creates new jobs in the host country as
foreign companies and foreign investors bring advanced technology,
expertise, and management practices, It leads to an increase in exports
from the host country as foreign companies, to attract foreign
investments in the country etc.
3) Disadvantages of FDI: FDI may result in a loss of control over their
domestic industries, a country may become vulnerable to economic
fluctuations leading to economic instability, Foreign investors often take
profits back to their home countries, FDI even results in environmental
degradation as foreign investors etc.
Check Your Progress 3 
1) FPI: FPI means any investment made by a person resident outside
India through equity instruments where such investment is less
than 10% of the post-issue paid-up share capital on a fully diluted
basis of a listed Indian company or less than 10% of the paid-up
value of each series of an equity instrument of a listed Indian
company.
2) Differentiate between Foreign Direct Investments and Foreign Portfolio
Investments: In FDI a direct business interest is established overseas
whereas FPI is not a direct investment, FPI involves passive investors,
and FDI is all about active investors etc.
3) Various categories of Foreign Portfolio Investment: There are three
categories: Category I: This category is regarded as a low-risk category,
Category II: This category involves a medium degree of risk, and
Category III: This category is the riskiest among all.
Check Your Progress 4 
1) Advantages of Foreign Portfolio Investment: It stimulates demand for
companies’ stocks, offers greater diversification to investors, benefits
from fluctuations in exchange rates etc.
2) The various constraints and drawbacks associated with Foreign Portfolio
Investment (FPI) are that it may destabilize financial markets and
exchange rates, may lead to speculative behaviour in financial markets,
may expose a country’s currency to exchange rate fluctuations etc.
3) Prerequisites for qualifying as a Foreign Portfolio Investor (FPI): must
be a non-resident Indian, must not be a citizen of a country that has been
categorised under the public statement of FATF, if the bank is the
applicant, such a bank must belong to a nation whose central bank must
be a member of the Bank for International Settlements etc.
