--- Page 99 ---
193 
Foreign Direct 
Investment and Foreign 
Portfolio Investment 
23.5  ROUTES OF FDI 
In this section, we discuss the various routes through which FDI arrives in the 
host country concerning the Indian Economy. FDI offers lots of opportunities 
and contributes significantly to the economic development of the country. 
Keeping this in mind, the Indian government has been taking steps to 
promote foreign investment in India like relaxation in regulatory 
compliances, streamlining the complexities involved in the investment 
procedures etc. The FDI policy specifies the regulations governing the FDI, 
the areas where the FDI is allowed, the areas where the FDI is restricted, 
routes of FDI etc. FDI can be made through Automatic Routes and 
Government Routes. 
Automatic Route 
FDI through Automatic Route does not require investors to seek approval 
from the Government of India for the investment. Foreign investment in 
sectors like agriculture and animal husbandry, plantation, mining, petroleum 
and natural gas, airports, construction, manufacturing, industrial parks, 
e-commerce activities, railway infrastructure, asset construction companies, 
credit information companies, and pharmaceuticals are allowed under the 
automatic route. 
Government Route 
FDI through the Government Route requires investors to seek prior approval 
from the Government of India. Proposals for foreign investment under the 
Government Route are considered by the respective Administrative 
Ministry/Department. Foreign investment in sectors like mining, defence, 
broadcasting, print media/digital media, civil aviation, satellites, 
telecommunications, and private security agencies are the areas where prior 
approval from the Indian government is required and regulations and 
procedures as prescribed under FEMA (defined hereinafter) and by RBI must 
be followed.  
However, there are certain areas where FDI is strictly prohibited under any of 
the above-mentioned routes due to reasons like national security, protection 
of the nation’s interest etc. These areas include the lottery business, 
gambling, and betting, chit funds, Hundis and Nidhi companies, trading in 
transferable development rights, real estate business, manufacturing of cigars, 
cheroots, cigarillos and cigarettes, of tobacco or tobacco substitutes. The 
sectors that are not open to private sector investment include atomic energy 
and railway operations.  
23.6 ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF 
FDI 
FDI offers several benefits. These are: 


--- Page 100 ---
194 
Operational Aspects 
of Financial Markets vestment and Foreign
1) Contribution to Economic Growth: FDI contributes significantly to the
economic growth of the host country by injecting capital into various
sectors that lead to increased production, consumption, and overall
economic activity.
2) Jobs creation:  FDI creates new jobs in the host country as foreign
companies establish or expand their operations, hiring local workers and
professionals.
3) Bringing Technology:  Foreign investors bring advanced technology,
expertise, and management practices that increase the productivity and
competitiveness of the local industries.
4) Increase in exports: This leads to an increase in exports from the host
country as foreign companies may use local resources and labour to
produce goods and services for global markets.
5) Infrastructure development:  To attract foreign investments in the
country, host countries develop their infrastructure by investing in
transportation, energy, and telecommunications. Such development in
infrastructure benefits the entire economy.
6) Setting up of new industries : FDI helps in diversifying the host
country’s economy by setting up new industries and developing new
sectors.
7) Access to new markets:  Local firms can benefit from foreign investors’
global networks, gaining access to new markets and distribution
channels.
8) Increased government revenue:  FDI also results in enhancing
government revenue by way of taxes.
Disadvantages of FDI: 
The following are certain disadvantages of FDI: 
1) FDI may result in a loss of control over their domestic industries which
can also affect the ability to make independent decisions.
2) Due to the policies of foreign investors, a country may become
vulnerable to economic fluctuations leading to economic instability.
3) Foreign investors often take profits back to their home countries,
reducing the amount of money reinvested in the host country’s economy.
4) FDI even results in environmental degradation as foreign investors may
prioritize profit over environmental sustainability.
5) Host countries may face challenges in protecting their intellectual
property rights when collaborating with foreign investors, potentially
leading to knowledge and technology leakage.


--- Page 101 ---
195 
Foreign Direct 
Investment and Foreign 
Portfolio Investment 
6) Increased FDI may sometimes intensify competition for local resources,
potentially driving up costs and pricing local businesses out of the
market.
23.7 HIGHLIGHTS OF FDI POLICY 2020 
FDI is regulated primarily by the Department of Promotion of Industry and 
International Trade (DPIIT), under the Government of India. The latest 
policy released by DPIIT is the Consolidated Foreign Direct Investment 
(FDI) Policy of 2020, effective from October 15, 2020. Major highlights of 
this policy are discussed in this section. The FDI policy of a country is 
revised as per the changing needs and economic environment of the country. 
Some of the highlights of FDI policy 2020 are: 
1) List of Eligible investors:
Non-resident entities can invest in India under the FDI Policy, with
certain sectors/activities prohibited. NRIs residing in Nepal and Bhutan,
as well as citizens of these countries, can invest in Indian companies on a
repatriation basis. Overseas Corporate Bodies (OCBs) not under RBI
scrutiny can invest as non-resident entities under the FDI Policy and
Foreign Exchange Management (Non-Debt Instrument) Rules, 2019.
Companies, trusts, and partnership firms incorporated abroad and
controlled by NRIs can invest in India under special dispensation.
Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPIs) and Foreign Venture Capital Investors
(FVCIs) are also permitted to make investments, with registered FPIs
and NRIs able to trade through recognized Indian Stock Exchanges via
registered brokers.
2) Eligible Investee Entities:
It includes Indian companies authorized to issue capital for FDI. NRIs
can invest in partnership firms or proprietary concerns on a non-
repatriation basis, using inward remittances or funds from specified
accounts, provided the businesses are not in agriculture, plantation, real
estate, or print media. Trusts cannot receive foreign investments except
for SEBI-regulated VCFs. LLPs can receive foreign investment under
the automatic route, allowing downstream investments and conversion
into companies where permitted. Investment vehicles and startups can
also attract foreign investments under specific guidelines outlined in the
Foreign Exchange Management Rules, 2019.
3) Entry Routes for Investment:
Non-residents can invest in Indian companies’ equity shares, convertible
debentures, or preference shares through either the Automatic Route or
the Government Route.


--- Page 102 ---
196 
Operational Aspects 
of Financial Markets vestment and Foreign
Prohibited sectors for FDI include: 
 Lottery business (government/private, online, etc.)
 Gambling and betting activities, including casinos
 Chit funds
 Nidhi companies
 Trading in Transferable Development Rights (TDRs)
 Real estate business or construction of farmhouses (excluding specific
exceptions)
 Manufacturing of cigars, cheroots, tobacco etc.
 Certain activities/sectors closed to private sector investment include
Atomic Energy and railway operations, except for specific permitted
activities. Additionally, foreign technology collaboration in any form,
such as licensing for franchises, trademarks, brand names, or
management contracts, is prohibited for lottery business, gambling, and
betting activities.
Percentage of FDI Allowed in Major Sectors: 
 Agriculture & Animal Husbandry: 100% (through automatic route)
 Plantation Sector: 100% (through automatic route)
 Mining: 100% (through automatic route)
 Mining and mineral separation of titanium: 100% (through government
route)
 Petroleum & Natural Gas: 100% (through automatic route)
 Petroleum refining by the Public Sector Undertakings (PSU): 49%
(through automatic route)
 Defence Manufacturing: 100% (Automatic up to 49% Above 49% under
Government route in cases resulting in access to modern technology in
the country)
 E-commerce activities: 100% (through automatic route)
 Multi Brand Retail Trading: 51% (through government route)
 Insurance: 49% (through automatic route)
 Banking- Private Sector: 74% (Automatic up to 49% above 49% & up to
74% under Government route)


--- Page 103 ---
197 
Foreign Direct 
Investment and Foreign 
Portfolio Investment 
 Banking- Public Sector: 20% (through government route)
 Food products manufactured or produced in India: 100% (through
government route).
For more details on FDI Policy, 2020 refer https://dpiit.gov.in/sites/ 
default/files/FDI-PolicyCircular-2020-29October2020_0.pdf. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) Elaborate on the different pathways (routes) for Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI).
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……….…………………………………………………………………...
2) Discuss the various benefits of FDI.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……….…………………………………………………………………...
3) What are the disadvantages of FDI?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……….…………………………………………………………………...
23.8 CONCEPT OF FOREIGN PORTFOLIO 
INVESTMENT (FPI) 
In the Indian context, FPI has been defined as “Foreign portfolio 
investment” means any investment made by a person resident outside 
India through equity instruments where such investment is less than 
10% of the post-issue paid-up share capital on a fully diluted basis of a 
listed Indian company or less than 10% of the paid-up value of each 
series of an equity instrument of a listed Indian company Rule 2(t) of 
FEM (Non-debt Instruments) Rules, 2019 and para 2.1.20 of FDI 
Policy dated 15-10-2020.  
Foreign Portfolio Investment refers to investments made by foreign 
individuals, institutions, or funds into financial assets in another country like 
stocks, bonds, or other securities. 


--- Page 104 ---
198 
Operational Aspects 
of Financial Markets vestment and Foreign
Securities and Exchange Board of India is the regulatory body that regulates 
FPI in India. The National Securities Depository Limited (NSDL) maintains a 
list of all the registered FPIs in India and this list of registered FPIs is 
publicly available on their website. 
23.9  DIFFERENCE BETWEEN FDI AND FPI 
FDI and FPI refer to investments that involve investing in foreign countries. 
Foreign Direct Investment refers to investments that require a long-term 
commitment that leads to the establishment of business interest in the foreign 
country whereas FPI refers to investments that are short-term in nature and 
that are intended to diversify investment portfolios. Such investments also 
allow the investors to take part in the growth of foreign economies. The key 
differences between FDI and FPI are: 
 In FDI a direct business interest is established overseas whereas FPI is
not a direct investment.
 An FDI leads to the sharing of resources, transfer of technology know-
how, and funds and involves a joint venture or setting up of a subsidiary.
IN FPI no such transfer of knowledge and technology takes place.
 Foreign direct investment is for a longer duration than foreign portfolio
investment. FDI may include establishing a manufacturing unit,
acquiring a company, or entering into a joint venture. FPI is a short-term
form of investment and is done to diversify investment portfolios and
take benefit of short-term market opportunities.
 FDI is made by institutions or venture capital companies whereas FPI
simply involves investing in securities or assets outside the country.
 FPI is highly liquid and can be purchased and sold easily. Whereas FDI
is not that liquid as it is a long-term investment.
 FPI involves passive investors, and FDI is all about active investors.
 In FDI, the investor enjoys a say in the decision-making and actively
participates in the operations and administration of the company.
However, in the case of FPI, the investor does not have any say in the
management of the company.
 The risk in FDI is higher than in FPI. FDI is subject to various risks that
relate to the political situation, economic conditions regulatory
provisions and structure risks in the host country. Whereas FPI is subject
to the risk that is associated with market volatility and is highly affected
by fluctuations and changes in the currency, interest rates, etc.
23.10  CATEGORIES OF FPI  
FPI is typically categorized under three categories as explained under: 


--- Page 105 ---
199 
Foreign Direct 
Investment and Foreign 
Portfolio Investment 
 Category I: This category is regarded as a low-risk category. It comprises
government/government-related establishments like central banks and
international agencies like the World Bank, and IMF. For example, a
sovereign wealth fund is a Category I FPI.
 Category II: This category involves a medium degree of risk. This
category comprises mutual funds, insurance firms, asset management
companies, banks, and pension funds.
 Category III: This category is the riskiest among all. It includes all other
forms of investments that do not fall into Category I and Category II
Example: Private equity funds.
Check Your Progress 3 
1) What do you understand by FPI?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……….…………………………………………………………………...
2) Differentiate between Foreign Direct Investments and Foreign Portfolio
Investments.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……….…………………………………………………………………...
3) Describe the various categories of Foreign Portfolio Investment.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……….…………………………………………………………………...
23.11 ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF 
FPI 
The following are the advantages offered by FPI: 
1) Foreign portfolio investments stimulate demand for companies’ stocks,
facilitating the raising of capital in a cost-effective manner.
2) It offers greater diversification to investors which lead to extending
potential benefits from this broader investment base.


--- Page 106 ---
200 
Operational Aspects 
of Financial Markets vestment and Foreign
3) Investors can also benefit from fluctuations in exchange rates.
4) Overseas markets offer investors access to larger markets that may
sometimes have less competition compared to their local market. This
implies they can enjoy reduced competition in foreign countries.
5) FPI also offers liquidity ensuring that investors have the agility to
capitalize swiftly on favourable opportunities.
6) FPI can boost stock market performance by increasing demand for
shares of Indian companies. This, in turn, can benefit both companies
and individual investors.
7) FPI brings foreign capital into the Indian financial markets that can be
used for various purposes like infrastructure development, job creation,
and economic growth.
Disadvantages of FPI 
The various disadvantages associated with Foreign Portfolio Investment 
(FPI) are: 
1) Large inflows and outflows of foreign capital in the form of FPI can
destabilize financial markets and exchange rates. In times of uncertainty
like economic slowdown, foreign investors withdraw their investments
which may lead to capital flight.
2) It may sometimes lead to speculative behaviour in financial markets, as
short-term investors seek quick profits. Such speculation can create
market bubbles and lead to market volatility.
3) FPI exposes a country’s currency to exchange rate fluctuations which
may result in risks for both investors and the country’s economy.
4) Foreign investors in FPI typically do not have a long-term commitment
to the country and therefore such foreign investors may not align with
the country's long-term economic goals.
5) FPI can encourage herd behaviour among investors which may lead to a
cascading effect that can cause market panics.
6) FPI prioritizes short-term profits over the long-term interests of local
businesses. This results in creating pressure on companies to focus on
quarterly results at the expense of long-term growth and sustainability.
7) FPI also attracts manipulative activities by foreign investors who exploit
regulatory gaps or engage in unethical trading practices.
8) Managing and regulating FPI flows can be challenging for governments,
requiring strong oversight and regulatory frameworks to prevent abuses
and maintain financial stability.
