--- Page 23 ---
 
 89
Estimation of Two-
Variable Regression 
Models 
 
4.8  KEYWORDS 
Confidence 
Interval  
It refers to a rule used to construct an interval. The 
interval keeps the estimated values over repeated 
samples within a margin of error limited to the level of 
significance (confidence level) chosen. 
Confidence Level It refers to the percentage of samples in which the 
estimated sample value remains closer to the population 
value.  
Consistent 
Estimator 
An estimator that converges in probability to the 
population parameter as the sample size grows without 
bound. 
Heteroscedasticity It refers to a situation where the variance of the error 
term is not constant. 
OLS Method It refers to the method of estimation in which the ‘sum 
of squared residuals’ is minimum. 
R-Squared  It refers to the proportion of the total variation in the 
dependent variable that is explained by the independent 
variables included in the regression model. 
4.9 SOME USEFUL BOOKS 
Gujarati, D N and D C Porter (2009), Basic Econometrics , Fifth Edition, 
McGraw Hill 
Johnston, J., Dinardo, J. (2007), “ Econometric Methods ”, 4 th Edition, McGraw-
Hill Education (Asia), International Edition, pp. 109-125 
Maddala, G. S. and K. Lahiri (2009), Introduction to Econometrics , Fourth 
Edition, John Wiley and Sons 
Wooldrige, Jeffrey (2022), Introductory Econometrics, Seventh Edition, Cengage 
Learning  
4.10 ANSWERS/ HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
 PROGRESS EXERCISES  
Check Your Progress 1 
1) Go through Sub-Section 4.21 and answer.  
2)  𝛽ଶ෢ =  
∑ ௫ ೔௬ ೔
೙
೔సభ
∑ ௫ ೔మ೙
೔సభ
=  
 ଶଵ଻ଽ .ଶ଴ସ
ସ଴ଶହ .ସଷ = 0.541326 
𝛽ଵ෢  = 𝑌 − 𝛽ଶ෢ 𝑋 
𝑌 =  
∑ ௒ ೔
೙
೔సభ
௡
=  
ଷଵ଴ଵ .ଷହ
ହଶ଺ = 5.896103   


--- Page 24 ---
 
90 
 
Classical Regression 
Model 𝑋 =  
∑ ௑ ೔
೙
೔సభ
௡ =  
଺଺଴଼ .଴
ହଶ଺ = 12.5627  
Therefore, 𝛽ଵ෢ =  5.896103 − 0.541326 (12.5627) = −0.9043 
3)  The computed value of 𝛽ଶ෢ =  0.541326 means that for every one-year 
increase (decrease) in formal education of 𝑋௜ (measured in years), the 
hourly wage rate 𝑋௜ (measured in dollars per hour) increases (decreases) 
by 0.5413 dollars per hour or 54.13 cents per hour. 
4)  You should describe the simple regression model and its residual in terms 
of equation (4.3) in the text. Subsequently, you should specify the normal 
probability density function of the error term and the likelihood function 
as equation (4.32).  
Check Your Progress 2 
1) The variance of the OLS estimators is given in Section 4.3. 
2)  The algebraic properties of OLS estimators are described in Sub-Section 
4.4.1.  
3) The statistical properties of OLS estimators are unbiasedness, consistency 
and BLUE. Go through Sub-Section 4.4.2 for details. 
4) The Gauss-Markov theorem states that given the assumptions of CLRM, 
the least squares estimators have minimum variance in the class of all 
linear unbiased estimators, i.e., they are BLUE or ‘best linear unbiased 
estimator’. 
3)  The estimators of the homoscedastic variance of the error term 𝑢௜ is given 
by 𝜎ොଶ  =  
∑ ௨ ഢෞ మ
୬ିଶ
. We have ∑ 𝑢పෝ ଶ௡
௜ୀଵ = 5980.682, n =526. Therefore, 𝜎ොଶ  =
 
ହଽ଼଴ .଺଼ଶ
ହଶ଺ିଶ =  
ହଽ଼଴ .଺଼ଶ
ହଶସ = 11.4135. 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) 𝑟ଶ = 1 −
ோௌௌ
்ௌௌ = 1 −
∑ 𝑢𝑖ෝ 2
∑ ௬ ೔మ೙
೔సభ
  
= 1 −
ହଽ଼଴ .଺଼ଶ
଻ଵ଺଴ .ସଵସ = 1 −  0.8352 = 0.1648   
This means that 16.48 per cent of the total sample variation in Yi, the 
hourly wage rate, is explained by or attributable to the variation in 
regressor Xi, the years of formal education.  
2) Given that H o: β2 = 0 and H 1: β2 ≠ 0, we need to compute the test statistic 
𝑡 =
ఉ మ෢ ିఉ మ
௦௘  (ఉ మ෢ ).We also need to calculate the estimated standard error of 𝛽ଶ෢  as 
𝑠𝑒ෞ ൫𝛽ଶ෢ ൯ = ට 𝑣𝑎𝑟ෞ ൫𝛽ଶ෢ ൯  = √0.002835 =  0.0532. Hence, 𝑡 =
ఉ మ෢ ିఉ మ
௦௘  (ఉ మ෢ ) =
 
଴ .ହସଵଷ  ି଴
଴ .଴ହଷଶ = 10.1667. The critical value of 𝑡(524)at 5% significance level 


--- Page 25 ---
 
 91
Estimation of Two-
Variable Regression 
Models 
 
is𝑡ఈ ଶൗ (524) =  𝑡଴ .଴ଶହ (524)  = 1.960 . Thus, at 5% significance level (α = 
0.05), |𝑡| = 10.167 > 𝑡଴ .଴ଶହ (∞)  = 1.960 . Therefore, we reject the null 
Ho: β2 = 0 at 5% level of significance. This indicates the existence of a 
relationship between the wage rate and the number of years of formal 
education in our sample.  
3) The 95% confidence interval of 𝑌଴  for the given 𝑋଴  is wider than the mean 
value 𝑌௢ . When the 95% confidence interval for each value of X is plotted, 
we get a confidence band. The width of the confidence band is the 
smallest when 𝑋௢ =  𝑋 and it gets wider as 𝑋௢  moves away from  𝑋 value. 
Thus, the predictive capacity of 𝑋௢  decreases as it departs from the 𝑋. 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 26 ---
UNIT 5  RESIDUAL ANALYSIS   
Structure 
5.0  Objectives 
5.1  Introduction 
5.2  Issues in Estimation 
5.3  Analysis of Residuals 
 5.3.1 Residual Plot 
 5.3.2 Detection of Potential Problems  
 5.3.3 Residuals against predicted Values 
 5.3.4 Residual Plot over Time 
5.4  Outliers 
5.5  Visual Detection of Heteroscedasticity 
5.6 Visual Detection of Autocorrelation 
5.7 Test for Normality 
5.8 Certain Special Cases 
 5.8.1 Regression through the Origin 
 5.8.2 Change in Origin and Scale of the Variables 
 5.8.3 Linearlisation of Certain Non-Linear Forms 
 5.8.4 Choice of Functional Form 
5.9 Limitations of Regression Analysis 
5.10 Let Us Sum Up 
5.11 Key Words 
5.12 Some Useful Books/References 
5.13 Answers/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
5.0 OBJECTIVES 
After going through this unit, you should be in a position to 
 appreciate the importance of model diagnostics in econometrics and its role in 
ensuring the reliability of regression analysis results; 
 determine techniques for analysing residuals such as plotting residuals against 
predicted values and over time to detect outliers 
 assess the estimated regression model in terms of goodness of fit. 
 analyse visual methods for detecting heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation in 
regression models;  
 explore testing for normality; and 
 address special cases in regression analysis such as regression through the 
origin, variable origin and scale adjustments, and optimal functional form 
selection. 
 
 Dr. Gurleen Kaur, Assistant Professor, Department of Economics, Sri Guru Gobind Singh 
College of Commerce, University of Delhi 


--- Page 27 ---
 
 93
Models Diagnostics 5.1 INTRODUCTION 
The pursuit of estimates for parameters that underlie economically meaningful 
relationships has consistently stood at the core of applied econometric modelling 
endeavours. Consequently, estimation of parameters is an important step in 
econometrics.  
Within the framework of the Classical Linear Regression Model (CLRM), a 
pivotal assumption stipulates that the model employed for analysis is “correctly 
specified” (see Unit 8 for details on specification issues). This requirement 
presents a formidable challenge, as the notion of a flawless model remains 
elusive. In the realm of econometric modelling, the objective is to encapsulate the 
essential characteristics of an economic phenomenon while considering elements 
such as underlying economic theory, prior empirical research, intuition, and 
research expertise. Attempting to encompass every conceivable factor that 
impacts a particular research subject would lead to the creation of an impractical 
and cumbersome model with restricted practical applicability. 
It is not always possible to build a perfect econometric model at the first instance. 
After estimation of the parameters we check whether the model satisfies the 
assumptions and whether the model is specified properly. We will discuss 
specification issues in Unit 8. In this Unit we will try to examine the model on 
the basis of certain rudimentary methods such as visual inspection of the 
residuals.  
5.2 ISSUES IN ESTIMATION 
We have studied the four assumptions regarding the error term in a simple 
regression model. These assumptions are: 𝐸(𝑢௜) = 0;  𝐸(𝑢௜
ଶ ) = 𝜎ଶ ;  𝐸(𝑋௜𝑢௜) =
0;  𝐸൫𝑢௜𝑢௝൯ = 0. These assumptions are ideal scenarios – they are not fulfilled in 
all the cases. In particular, when 𝐸(𝑢௜
ଶ ) ≠ 𝜎ଶ , we encounter the problem of 
heteroscedasticity (i.e., the error variance is not constant throughout the dataset). 
When 𝐸(𝑋௜𝑢௜) ≠ 0, we have the problem of endogeneity (i.e., the explanatory 
variable is not independent of the error term). When  𝐸൫𝑢௜𝑢௝൯ ≠ 0, we face the 
problem of autocorrelation in the dataset. When the assumptions are violated the 
OLS estimators do not fulfil the desirable properties of an estimator.  
There are test procedures to detect the problems of heteroscedasticity, 
endogeneity and autocorrelation. However, by looking into the residual plot of a 
regression model, we can sense the possibility of certain problems in the dataset.  
When computing the Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) estimate of the parameter 
‘β’, certain observations might wield disproportionate influence compared to 
others. Should a handful of observations exert an exceptionally strong impact, it 
is prudent to investigate whether they stem from erroneous data, such as decimal 
point misplacement, or pertain to atypical cases, such as including the CEO of 
Apple in your sample on monthly salary of individuals! In a broader context, it is 
worthwhile to assess the robustness of the estimation results concerning 
seemingly minor alterations in the sample. In specific instances, opting for more 


--- Page 28 ---
 
94 
 
Classical Regression 
Model 
robust estimation techniques may prove advisable over employing OLS. Given 
that a linear regression model may not always suit the data at hand, it is essential 
to gauge its suitability by defining residuals and scrutinizing residual plots. 
5.3 ANALYSIS OF RESIDUALS 
Recall that we add an error variable ( 𝑢) to the regression model, which is not 
measurable. Based on the estimated coefficients of the model, we obtain the 
residuals ( 𝑢ො). The difference between the observed value of the dependent 
variable (Y) and the predicted value ( 𝑌෠) is called the residual (𝑢ො). Each data point 
has one residual. 
Residual = (Observed value – Predicted value) 
In terms of notations  
𝑢ො௜ = (𝑌௜ − 𝑌෠௜)       … (5.1) 
As you know from Unit 3, the error variable ( u) is assumed to have zero mean. 
The sum of the residuals also is equal to zero. We denote the residual as 𝑢ො or e.  
That is,∑ 𝑢ො௜ = 0. You can also write it as Σ e = 0.  
Residuals can be regarded as the disparities between the actual data points and 
corresponding model predictions. Consequently, these discrepancies serve as a 
measure of the unaccounted-for variability in the dependent variable, attributable 
to the limitations of the regression model. 
5.3.1 Residual Plot 
A high value of the error variance (𝜎௨
ଶ ) indicates lower explanatory power of a 
regression model (recall the definition of 𝑅ଶ ). High value of the error variance 
can occur if the residuals are widely dispersed. Therefore, we should find out if 
any of the residuals has a very high value. For this purpose, we should examine 
the residual plot of a regression model. First, we estimate the simple regression 
model (𝑌௜ = 𝛼 +  𝛽𝑋௜ +  𝑢௜) and then we compute the residuals. 
A residual plot is a graphical representation where the horizontal axis represents 
the independent variable ( 𝑋௜), and the vertical axis displays the residuals ( 𝑢ො௜). If 
the data points in a residual plot exhibit a random and evenly spread distribution 
around the horizontal axis, a linear regression model is a suitable choice for the 
data. Conversely, suppose the data points in the residual plot do not exhibit such 
random pattern – then it suggests that a nonlinear model would be a better 
alternative. 
5.3.2 Detection of Potential Problems  
Conducting a visual examination of residuals stands out as a highly efficient 
method for assessing the appropriateness of a regression model’s fit and verifying 
its foundational assumptions. Different types of graphical representations are 
available for scrutinizing various assumptions, and these visual aids can be 
generated using econometric software. 


--- Page 29 ---
 
 95
Models Diagnostics  
 
 
 
 
                (a: random)                                           (b: non-random U-shaped)  
 
 
 
 
 
                                    (c: non-random inverted-U) 
                              Fig. 5.1: Patterns of Residual Plot 
In Fig. 5.1 we present various patterns observed in a residual plot. There are three 
patterns shown in the figure. The first one (a) indicates a random pattern. The 
second one (b) indicates a U-shaped pattern while the third one (c) indicates an 
inverted-U pattern. Thus, the second and the third patterns are non-random. If we 
notice some non-random pattern in the residual plot, we infer that the linear 
regression model is not a good fit.  
5.3.2 Residuals against Predicted Values 
Creating a plot of residuals (e.g., 𝑢ො௜ or any of the scaled residuals (see subsequent 
section on scaling the variables) against their corresponding predicted or fitted 
values ( 𝑌෠௜) proves valuable in identifying various prevalent model deficiencies. 
Different interpretations can be attributed to specific types of plots featuring 𝑌෠௜ 
versus 𝑢ො௜. 
If the residual plot exhibits a pattern where the residuals can be enclosed within a 
horizontal band (see Fig. 5.2(a)), and these residuals fluctuate somewhat 
randomly within that band, it signifies the absence of model flaws. On the other 
hand, if the plot displays a pattern where the residuals are enclosed within an 
outward-opening funnel shape (see Fig. 5.2(b)), then the error variance is not 
constant. The error variance (𝜎௨ଶ ) increases with the predicted values ( 𝑌෠௜).When 
examining the plots and observing a pattern where the residuals can fit within an 
inward-opening funnel (see Fig. 5.2(c)),this pattern implies that the error variance 
is not uniform but rather decreases as a function of the predicted values (𝑌෠௜). 
In the event that the plot exhibits a configuration where the residuals can fit 
within a double bow shape (see Fig. 5.2(d)), this particular pattern serves as an 
indicator that the error variance is not uniform but instead is related to the 
predicted values ( 𝑌෠௜) in a proportional manner, ranging between 0 and 1. In such 
cases, Y might follow a ‘binomial distribution’ and suggests that the presumed 
relationship between Y and the predictor variables (Xs) is nonlinear. 
When the plot reveals a pattern where the residuals are enclosed within a curved 
shape (see Fig. 5.2(e)), this signifies nonlinearity in the model. It suggests that 
  -6 
 -3 
2 6 8 10 
0 
3 
6 
4  12 
  -6 
6 
  -6 
  -3 
2 6 8 10 
0 
3 
6 
4  12 
  -3 
2 6 8 10 
0 
3 
4  12 


--- Page 30 ---
 
96 
 
Classical Regression 
Model 
the presumed relationship between the dependent variable (Y) and the 
independent variables (X s) is nonlinear. This type of residual plot could also 
imply the need for incorporating additional explanatory variables into the model. 
In some cases, applying transformations (such as logarithmic) to the variables 
could prove beneficial when addressing such nonlinearity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)                                                                          (b)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             (c)  (d) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(e) 
Fig. 5.2: Residual Plot 
Plotting residuals against their corresponding explanatory variables can also 
provide valuable insights. The interpretation of these plots aligns with that of 
residual-versus-𝑌෠௜ plots and can be summarized as follows: 
(a) If all the residuals cluster within a horizontal band, with fluctuations appearing 
randomly within this band, it signifies a desirable scenario with no apparent model 
defects. 
𝑒௜
0 
𝑦ෝ 𝑖
𝑒௜
0 
𝑦ෝ 𝑖
𝑒௜
0 
𝑦ෝ 𝑖
𝑒௜
0 
𝑦ෝ 𝑖
𝑒௜
0 
𝑦ෝ 𝑖


--- Page 31 ---
 
 97
Models Diagnostics (b) When the residuals take an outward-opening funnel shape or an inward-opening 
funnel shape, this pattern suggests that variance is not constant across the sample. 
(c) If the plot shows a double bow pattern or nonlinear trend, it implies that the 
assumed relationship between the dependent variable ( 𝑌௜) and the explanatory 
variable ( 𝑋௜) may not be accurate. In such cases, various possibilities emerge, 
including y possibly being a proportion, the need for higher-order terms in 𝑋௜, or 
the requirement for data transformation to be considered. 
5.3.4 Residual Plots over Time 
Knowing the temporal sequence of data collection allows for the generation of 
residual plots with respect to time. Taking into account the Y-axis residuals and 
arranging them with respect to time is analogous to plotting residuals against 𝑌෠௜. 
In lieu of 𝑌෠௜, simply use the time order on the X-axis.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                    (a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                    (b) 
                                            Fig. 5.3: Inter-temporal Residual Plots 
 
If all the residuals are confined within a horizontal band, and they exhibit a 
somewhat random fluctuation within this band, it is considered favourable and 
suggests the absence of obvious model deflects. A funnel shape that opens 
outward or inward suggests that the variance is not consistent but rather changing 
over time. If you observe a double bow pattern or a nonlinear pattern, it implies 
that the assumed relationship is not linear. In such instances, it is advisable to 
incorporate linear or quadratic time terms into the model. 
Residual 
(ei) 
Time 
Residual 
(ei) 
Time 
