--- Page 22 ---
 
 
 
21 
Classical and Neo-
Classical Theories of 
International Trade 
The two countries, two commodities & two-factor model, imply that the capital-
rich country will export capital-intensive commodities and the labour-rich 
country will export labour-intensive commodities. But the concept of a country 
being rich in one factor or the other is not very clear. Economists quite often 
define factor abundance in terms of factor prices. Ohlin himself has followed this 
approach. Alternatively, factor abundance can be defined in physical terms. In 
this case, physical amounts of capital & Labour are to be compared. 
The Price Criterion of Relative Factor Abundance 
According to the price criterion, a country with relatively cheap capital and 
labour relatively dear is regarded as relatively capital-abundant, irrespective of its 
ratio of total quantities of capital to labour compared with the other country. In 
symbolic terms, when: 
(PK/PL) E < (PK/PL) I 
Country E is relatively capital- abundant. (Here, P stands for factor price and К 
for capital, L for labour and E and I for the two respective countries.) Ohlin‟s 
theorem may be verified diagrammatically in Figure. 1.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.1 Diagrammatic explanation of H-O model 
Let us take an example of the same two countries viz; England and India where 
England is a capital-rich country while India is a labour-abundant nation. 
Y 
Capital 
Y 
X 
P 
R 
P1 
0 
 A 
X 
X 
Y 
 
E 
M 
K 
I 
Labour 
S 
 
B 
 


--- Page 23 ---
 
 
 
22 
Theory of 
International Trade 
In the above diagram, XX is the isoquant (equal product curve) for the 
commodity X produced in England. YY is the isoquant representing commodity 
Y produced in India. It is very clear that XX is relatively capital intensive while 
YY is relatively labour incentive. The factor capital is represented on Y-axis 
while the factor labour is represented on the horizontal X-axis. 
PA is the price line or budget line of the country England. The price line PA is 
tangent to XX at E. The price line PA is also tangent to YY isoquant at K. Point 
K will help us to find out how much capital and labour is required to produce one 
unit of Y in England. 
P1B is the price line of the country India, The price line P 1B is tangent to YY at I. 
The price line RS which is drawn parallel to P 1B is tangent to XX at M. This will 
help us to find out how much capital and labour is required to produce one unit of 
commodity X in India. 
Under the given situations, the country England will choose the combination E. 
This means more specialisation in capital goods. It will not choose the 
combination K because it is more labour intensive and less capital intensive. 
Thus,
 according to Ohlin, England will specialise in the production of goods X 
by using the cheap factor capital extensively while India will specialise on 
commodity Y by using the cheap factor labour available in the country. 
Ohlin's theory concludes that the basis of international trade is the difference in 
commodity prices in the two countries. Differences in commodity prices are due 
to cost differences resulting from differences in factor endowments in two 
countries. A capital-rich country specialises in capital-intensive goods & exports 
them, while a labour-abundant country specialises in labour-intensive goods & 
exports them. 
As the Ricardian framework of comparative advantage was further improved 
upon in the Heckscher-Ohlin model, similarly, the H-O model was further 
developed by Paul Samuelson. Hence the extension of the H-O model is also 
referred to as Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson (H-O-S) model. H-O model states that 
trade takes place due to the different relative prices of different goods in different 
countries. Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson model demonstrates how free movements 
of goods between countries may bring about the factor price equalization.  
There are four main theorems in the H-O-S model.  
1) The Heckscher-Ohlin theorem  
2) The Stolper-Samuelson theorem 
3) The Factor Price Equalization theorem 
4) The Rybczynski theorem.
 


--- Page 24 ---
 
 
 
23 
Classical and Neo-
Classical Theories of 
International Trade 
Check Your Progress 3 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Point out five major assumptions of the Heckscher-Ohlin theory. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) What are the main conceptions of relative factor abundance? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3)  What are the extension theories of Heckscher-Ohlin theory? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
1.6  STOLPER –  SAMUELSON THEOREM 
Economists Paul Samuelson & Wolfgang Stolper have further contributed to this 
theory and have developed Stolper – Samuelson theorem. Stolper –Samuelson 
theorem explains the effect of change in relative product prices on factor 
allocation and income distribution. The Stopler-Samuelson theorem explains the 
relationship between changes in prices of goods and changes in prices of the 
factor of production such as wages and interest within the framework of the H- O 
theorem. The theorem states that if the price of the capital-intensive good 
increases then the price of capital will also increase, but the wages paid to labour 
will fall.  Thus, if the price of machinery goods increases (assume machinery 
goods as capital-intensive) then the interest charged on capital would also 
increase. But at the same time, there will be a decrease in the wages of the labour. 
Similarly, if the price of labour-intensive goods increases then the wage rate 
would increase while the interest rate will fall.  
The Stopler-Samuelson theorem was further extended by Jones, who developed 
the concept of „magnification effect' for prices in the cont ext of the H-O model.  
The magnification effect allows analysis of any change in the prices of both 
goods and provides information about the magnitude of the effects on wages and 
interest.  Most importantly, the magnification effect allows one to analyse the 


--- Page 25 ---
 
 
 
24 
Theory of 
International Trade 
effects of price changes on real wages and real interest earned by workers and 
capital owners.  This is crucial from the point of view of policy impact since real 
returns indicate the purchasing power of wages and rents after accounting for the 
price changes and thus are a better measure of well-being than simply the wage 
rate or rental rate alone.  
This theorem is relevant in the age of globalization and trade liberalization.  
When trade liberalization occurs in a country, prices of goods change, and the 
magnification effect can be applied to seek an important result.  A movement 
towards freer trade will cause the real return of the country's relatively abundant 
factor to rise, while the real return of the country's relatively scarce factor will 
fall.  Thus, if the US and India are two countries that move towards free trade, 
and if the US is capital –abundant (while India is labour-abundant), then capital 
owners in the US will experience an increase in the purchasing power of their 
rental income while workers will experience a decline in the purchasing power of 
their wage income (i.e., they will lose). Similarly, workers will gain in India but 
capital owners will lose.  
The reasons for this result are somewhat complex.  When a country moves to free 
trade the price of its exported goods will rise while the price of its imported 
goods will fall.  The higher prices in the export industry will inspire profit-
seeking firms to expand production.  At the same time, the import-competing 
industry suffering from falling prices, will want to reduce production to cut their 
losses.  Thus, capital and labour will be la id-off in the import-competing sector 
but will be in demand in the expanding export sector. 
However, a problem arises because the export sector is intensive in the country's 
(US) abundant factor, say capital –
 as per the H-O theorem.  This means that the 
export industry wants relatively more capital per worker than the ratio of factors 
that the import-competing industry is laying off.  In the transition, there will be 
an excess demand for capital, which will raise its price, and an excess supply of 
labour, which will bring down its price.  Hence, the capital owners in both 
industries experience an increase in their rents while the workers in both 
industries experience a decline in their wages. 
The theorem was originally developed to illuminate the issue of how tariffs 
would affect the incomes of workers and capitalists (i.e., the distribution of 
income) within a country because tariffs raise the domestic price of imported 
goods.  However, the theorem is just as useful when applied to trade 
liberalization, as explained above. However, it should be kept in mind that these 
results have been derived in a model with only two goods and two factors that are 
perfectly mobile between sectors.  This may not be valid in general.  In 
particular, a factor employed in a sector where output declines (because of 
competition from imports) will suffer a loss in its real reward if it has no 
alternative source of employment. 


--- Page 26 ---
 
 
 
25 
Classical and Neo-
Classical Theories of 
International Trade 
1.7  FACTOR-PRICE EQUALIZATION THEOREM 
According to the factor-price equalization theorem, when the prices of goods are 
equalized between countries due to international trade, the prices of the factors 
(i.e. capital and labour) also get equalized between countries.  This implies that 
freer trade will equalize the wages of workers and the rentals earned on capital 
throughout the world in the ultimate analysis.  
The theorem derives from the assumptions of the H-O model. The most critical is 
the assumption that the two countries share the same technology and that markets 
are perfectly competitive.   In perfect competition, factors are paid based on the 
value of their marginal productivity, which in turn depends upon the prices of the 
goods.  Thus, when prices differ between countries so will their marginal 
productivity, and hence so will their wages and rents.  However, once prices of 
goods are equalized, as in free trade demonstrated earlier, the values of marginal 
products are also equalized between countries; hence, the countries must also 
share the same wage rates and rental rates.  
However, it should be noted that the factor-price equalization is unlikely to apply 
perfectly in the real world.  The H-O model assumes that technology is the same 
between countries to focus on the effects of different factor endowments.  If 
production technologies differ across countries, as we assumed in the Ricardian 
model, then factor prices would not equalize once goods prices equalize. 
Check Your Progress 4 
Note: 
i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Point out the main argument of the Stopler-Samuelson theorem. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Describe the magnification effect in the context of the H-O model. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3)  Explain the main statement of Factor Price Equalization theory? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 


--- Page 27 ---
 
 
 
26 
Theory of 
International Trade 1.8  RYBCZYNSKI THEOREM 
The Rybczynski theorem postulates that  at constant commodity prices, an 
increase in the endowment of one factor will increase by a greater proportion of 
the output of the commodity intensive in that factor and will reduce the output of 
the other commodity. The theorem is useful in analyzing the effects of capital 
investment, immigration and emigration within the context of the H-O model. 
Rybczynski's theorem can be understood  diagrammatically with the help of 
figure 1.2. In Figure 1.2, EE reveals the labour constraints and  while DD reflects 
the capital constraint. At point A, production takes place.   Assume textiles as a 
labour-intensive good  and software as a capital item and  their production is 
depicted by C 1 C 2 for textiles and  S 1 S 2 for software. Now, let  us assume an 
increase in the wages of the labour,  which causes an outward parallel shift in the 
labour constraint line from DD to D1D1. Here, the production possibility frontier 
also shifts from point A to point B.  Production of textiles, the labor-intensive 
good, will shift from C1 to C2. Production of software, the capital-intensive good, 
will fall from S2 to S1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 
1.2 Diagrammatic representation of Rybczynski theorem 
If the endowment of capital (interest rate) increases, the capital constraint will 
shift out, resulting in an increase in software production and a decrease in textiles 
production. As mentioned earlier, since the labour constraint curve is steeper than 
the capital constraint curve, the software is a capital-intensive  item while textile 
is a labour-intensive item.  
This means that in general, an increase in a country's endowment of a factor will 
cause an increase in the output of the good  which uses that factor intensively and 
decrease the output of the other good. 
A 
Software 
Y 
X 
D1 
D 
E 
0 
 D1 
B 
Textile 
D 
 E 
C1 
 C2 
S1 
S2 


--- Page 28 ---
 
 
 
27 
Classical and Neo-
Classical Theories of 
International Trade 
Check Your Progress 5 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  What does the Rybczynski theorem postulate? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Point out the important factors which could be analysed in the context of 
Rybczynski's theorem. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3)  Explain the main statement of Factor Price Equalization theory? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
1.9  LET US SUM UP 
After reading this unit, we have been exposed to the different international trade 
theories. We started with the theory of mercantilism, and then we understood the 
pure theory of international trade or absolute advantage theory coined by Adam 
Smith in 1776
. After that,  we learned the comparative advantage theory 
developed by David Ricardo in 1817.   We  learnt that  both absolute advantage 
and comparative advantage theory considered labour as the only factor of 
production. Afterwards, we discussed  Heckscher Ohlin's (H-O) Theory. Bertil 
Ohlin has drawn his ideas from Eli Heckscher's General Equilibrium Analysis. 
Hence, it is also known as Heckscher Ohlin (H-O) Theory. The unit also 
mentioned the extensions of the Heckscher Ohlin (H-O) model. Three more 
theories have been developed by extending the H-O model. The Stopler-
Samuelson theorem explains the relationship between
 changes in prices of goods 
and changes in prices of a factor of production such as wages and interest within 
the framework of the H-O theorem. The theorem states that  if the price of the 
capital-intensive good increases, then the price of capital will also increase, but 
the wages paid to labour will fall.   Thus, if the price of machinery goods 
increases then the interest charged on  capital would also increase. The unit also 
presents the Factor-Price Equalization Theorem.   According to the factor-price 
equalization theorem when the prices of goods are equalized between countries 
due to international trade, the prices of the factors
 (i.e. capital and labour) also 


--- Page 29 ---
 
 
 
28 
Theory of 
International Trade 
get equalized between countries.   This implies that freer trade will equalize the 
wages of workers and  the rentals earned on capital throughout the world in the 
ultimate analysis. Finally, the unit concludes by discussing the Rybczynski 
theorem. The Rybczynski theorem postulates that at constant commodity prices, 
an increase in the endowment of one factor will increase by a greater proportion 
of the output of the commodity intensive in that factor and will reduce the output 
of the other commodity. 
1.10  KEYWORDS 
International Trade  The trade that takes place between buyers and 
sellers of two different nations is called 
international trade.   
Mercantilism  It is the trade theory which postulates that countries 
should encourage exports and discourage imports. 
The theory argues that a nation should increase 
exports and reduce imports and export is the only 
way to accumulate wealth.  
Comparative advantage  A country has a comparative advantage in 
producing a good „A‟ if the cost of producing „A‟ 
is lower at home than in the other country.  
Factor Endowments  A country‟s endowments with resources like land, 
labour, capital etc.  
Capital-Abundant Country A country well-endowed with capital is referred to 
as capital abundant.  
Magnification Effect  The magnification effect allows analysis of any 
change in the prices of both goods and provides 
information about the magnitude of the effects on 
wages and interest.  
1.11  SOME USEFUL REFERENCES 
James Gerber. 2014 International Economics, 6th Ed., Pearson Education, USA.  
Krugman, Paul R. and Maurice Obstfeld, 1997. International Economics: Theory 
and Policy, 4th Ed., Addison-Wesley, Massachusetts, USA.  
Sodersten, B. 1980. International Economics, Macmillan London.  
Sodersten, B. and Reed, G. 1994. International Economics, 3 rd Ed., Macmillan 
London.  
Salvatore, D. John   2004. International Economics, 8th Ed., Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
New Jersey. 


--- Page 30 ---
 
 
 
29 
Classical and Neo-
Classical Theories of 
International Trade 
1.12  ANSWERS/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES  
Check Your Progress 1 
1)   Refer to Section 1.1 
2)   Refer to Section 1.2 
Check Your Progress 2 
1)  Refer to Sections 1.3 and 1.4 
2)  Refer to Sections 1.3 and 1.4 
3)  Refer to Section 1.4 
Check Your Progress 3 
1)  Refer to Section 1. 5 
2)  Refer to Section 1.5 
3)  Refer to Section 1.5 
Check Your Progress 4 
1)  Refer to Section 1. 6 
2)  Refer to Section 1.6 
3)  Refer to Section 1.7 
Check Your Progress 5 
1)  Refer to Section 1.8 
2)  Refer to Section 1.8 
 
