--- Page 12 ---
 
 
 
11 
Classical and Neo-
Classical Theories of 
International Trade 
 
 
 
 
 
BLOCK 1 
 
 
THEORY OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Unit 1 Classical and Neo-Classical Theories of 
International Trade 
Unit 2 Gains from Trade 


--- Page 13 ---
 
 
 
12 
Theory of 
International Trade BLOCK INTRODUCTION 
This block reveals the rationale behind International trade and why countries engage in trade. 
It presents a comparative picture of various theories of International trade. It highlights the 
various gains associated with international trade and how they can be measured. A 
comparative picture of various types of gains has also been presented in this block. 
This block consists of 2 units. 
Unit 1: Classical and Neo-Classical Theories of International Trade  discusses the major 
theories of international trade. It presents the rationale behind why countries trade with each 
other. The unit covers discussion on major theories, like absolute advantage theory, 
comparative theory, and H-O theory. Further, the theories like Stolper – Samuelson theorem, 
Factor Price Equalisation theory, and Rybczynski theorem developed by extending the H- O 
model have also been discussed.  
Unit 2: Gains from International Trade  throws light on sources of gains, factors 
determining gains from trade and how these gains can be measured. It also discusses the 
concept of the Production Possibilities Curve in International trade. The unit also elucidates 
the situation of the potential and actual gain, Free Trade versus no trade and static and 
dynamic gains. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  


--- Page 14 ---
 
 
 
13 
Classical and Neo-
Classical Theories of 
International Trade 
UNIT 1  CLASSICAL AND NEO-CLASSICAL 
THEORIES OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE 
Structure 
1.0 Objectives 
1.1 Introduction 
1.2 Theory of Mercantilism 
1.3 Absolute Advantage Theory 
1.4 Comparative Advantage Theory 
1.5 Heckscher –Ohlin Theory 
1.6 Stolper – Samuelson Theorem 
1.7 Factor-Price Equalization Theorem 
1.8 Rybczynski Theorem 
1.9 Lets Sum Up 
1.10 Key Words 
1.11 Some useful References  
1.12 Answers/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercise     
1.0  OBJECTIVES 
After studying this Unit, you should be able to:  
 Explain the difference between Domestic and International Trade;  
 describe why two nations trade with each other; 
 explain Absolute Advantage Theory; 
 explain Comparative Advantage Theory; 
 differentiate between Absolute Advantage Theory and Comparative 
Advantage Theory; 
 describe Heckscher–Ohlin Theory;  
 explain the Stolper – Samuelson theorem; 
 explain Factor Price Equalisation theory; and  
 describe Rybczynski Theorem. 
                                                 
 Contributed by  Sh. Rahul Chaudhary, Consultant IGNOU.  


--- Page 15 ---
 
 
 
14 
Theory of 
International Trade 1.1   INTRODUCTION 
In this unit, we will discuss the major theories of international trade. At the 
beginning of this unit, we will try to understand what international trade is and 
how it differs from domestic trade. The reasons why countries trade with each 
other will also be discussed. Having understood these, the major theories of 
international trade that have evolved, like absolute advantage theory, comparative 
theory, and H-O theory, will be explained. Further, the theories like Stolper – 
Samuelson theorem, Factor Price Equalisation theory, and Rybczynski theorem 
developed by extending the H-O model will also be discussed.  
Before reading the theories of international trade you should understand what is, 
international trade, and why does trade take place?  
In simple words, trade refers to buying and selling goods and services in 
exchange for money. The sellers sell the goods and services while the buyers buy 
the same. When these activities occur domestically in the country, it is referred to 
as domestic trade or only trade. But, when the exchange of goods and services 
takes place between buyer and seller of two different nations it is called 
international trade.   
Now, the question is, why do we trade at all?  
The simple answer to this question is that any nation cannot produce everything it 
needs. One nation may have plenty of natural resources but a scarcity of meat, 
fish, etc. One country may be an efficient milk producer but have a scarcity of 
wheat and rice. In this situation, nations come together and exchange goods 
among them. We will discuss more about gains from trade in Unit 2. 
 
1.2  THEORY OF MERCANTILI SM 
Mercantilism is an exercise that is more than 500 years old. The base of this 
theory was the "commercial revolution", the transition from local economies to 
national economies, from feudalism to capitalism, and from a rudimentary trade 
to a larger international trade. 
The theory of mercantilism postulates that countries should encourage exports 
and discourage imports. The tendency to export more and import less and receive 
gold (as gold was the medium of exchange) in exchange is called Mercantilism. 
Mercantilism was the economic system of the major trading nations during the 
16th to 18 th centuries. The theory assumed that national wealth and power were 
best served by increasing exports and collecting precious metals like gold in 
return. The theory states that government should play a vital role in regulating the 
economy to encourage exports and discourage imports by using subsidies and 
taxes. According to this theory, the government should accumulate as much gold 
as possible, which can only be done through exports.
  


--- Page 16 ---
 
 
 
15 
Classical and Neo-
Classical Theories of 
International Trade 
Check Your Progress 1 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Explain the difference between Domestic and International Trade. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Write down a short note on Mercantilism. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
1.3 ABSOLUTE ADVANTAGE THEORY 
Several theories have been developed in light of the activities discussed above. 
These theories have evolved for more than 200 years now.  Adam Smith 
propounded the basic theory of international trade in 1776. Adam Smith in his 
seminal work „An inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of the 
Nation‟ for the first time, provided a theoretical explanation of why trade should 
take place between two nations.  
Adam Smith, in his book propounded the theory of absolute advantage, which 
states that a country should specialize in those products which it can produce 
efficiently, where efficiency is measured in terms of absolute labour costs. This 
theory assumes that there is only one factor of production: labour. 
Adam Smith wrote in „The Wealth of Nations ‟, “If a foreign country  can supply 
us with a commodity cheaper than we can make it, better buy it of them with 
some part of the produce of our industry, employed in a way in which we have 
some advantage". 
According to Adam Smith, trade between two nations is based on absolute cost 
advantage. When one is more efficient than (or has an absolute advantage over) 
another in the production of one commodity but is less efficient than (or has an 
absolute disadvantage with respect to) the other nation in producing a second 
commodity, then both the nations can gain by each specializing in the production 
of the commodity of its absolute advantage and exchanging part of its output with 
the other nation for the commodity of its absolute disadvantage. In this process, 
the resources are utilized most efficiently and the output of both commodities 
will rise.  This increase in output of both the commodities measures the Gains 
from specialization in production available to be divided between the two nations 
through trade. 


--- Page 17 ---
 
 
 
16 
Theory of 
International Trade 
In very simple words, he stated that trade would benefit both countries if country 
A exported the goods, which it can produce at a lower cost than country B and 
imported the goods, which country B can produce at a lower cost than it. 
The above description of the theory can be understood better with the following 
example. Suppose there are two countries A and B, which produce wheat and rice 
with an equal amount of resources i.e. 200 labourers. Country A uses 10 
labourers to produce 1 ton of wheat and 20 labourers to produce 1 ton of rice. 
Country B uses 25 units of labourers to produce 1 ton of wheat and 5 units of 
labourers to produce 1 ton of rice.  
Table
 1.1 Number of labourers used by Country A and Country B for 
producing 1 ton of Wheat and Rice  
 Country A  Country B  
Wheat (1 ton) 10 labourers 25 labourers 
Rice (1 ton) 20 labourers 5 labourers 
This is evident from Table 1.1 that country A has an absolute advantage in 
producing wheat as it can produce 1 ton of wheat by using fewer labourers as 
compared to country B. On the other hand, country B has an absolute advantage 
in producing rice as it can produce 1 ton of rice by employing fewer labourers in 
comparison to country A. Now, if there is no trade between these countries and 
resources (in this case there are a total of 200 labourers) are being used equally to 
produce wheat and rice, country A would produce 10 tons of wheat (100/10), and 
5 tons of rice (100/20) and country B would produce 4 tons of wheat (100/25) 
and 20 tons of rice (100/5). Thus, total production without trade (i.e., autarky) is 
39 tons (14 tons of wheat and 25 tons of rice). 
Table
 1.2 Production volume of wheat and rice without trade 
 Country A (in Tons) Country B (in Tons) 
Wheat 10 4 
Rice 5 20 
Now, if both countries open up to trade with each other and specialize in goods in 
which they have an absolute advantage, the total production would be higher. If a 
trade takes place, Country A would produce 20 tons of wheat with 200 labourers; 
whereas, country B would produce 40 tons of rice with 200 labourers. Thus, total 
production would be 60 units (20 tons of wheat and 40 tons of rice). 
Table
 1.3 Production volume of wheat and rice with trade 
 Country A (in Tons) Country B (in Tons) 
Wheat 20 0 
Rice 0 40 
 


--- Page 18 ---
 
 
 
17 
Classical and Neo-
Classical Theories of 
International Trade 
It is clear from the above descriptive example that without specialization, the 
total production of countries was 39 tons which increased to 60 tons after 
specialization from trade opportunities. This is the welfare gains from trade. 
Therefore, the theory of absolute advantages shows that pattern of trade based on 
absolute cost differences would benefit both the countries. 
1.4  COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE THEORY   
Elaborating on the theory of absolute advantage, David Ricardo presented his 
work in 1817 in his book 'Principles of Political Economy and Taxation'.  In this 
book, he presented the law of comparative advantage. This is one of the most 
important and still unchallenged laws of economics with many practical 
applications. The Ricardian theory states that trade can be beneficial for two 
countries even if one country has an absolute advantage in all the products and 
the other country has no absolute advantage in any of the products.  Ricardo 
argued that “…a nation, like a person, gains from the trade by exporting the 
goods or services in which it has its greatest comparative advantage in 
productivity and importing those in which it has the least comparative 
advan
tage”. A nation behaves no differently from an individual who does not 
attempt to produce all the commodities he needs.  Rather, he produces only that 
commodity that he can produce most efficiently and then exchanges part of his 
output for the other commodities he needs or wants.  The first nation would be 
better off provided they specialize in the production and export of those 
commodities in which its absolute disadvantage is smaller (this is the commodity 
of its comparative advantage) and import the commodity in which its absolute 
disadvantage is greater (this is the commodity of its comparative disadvantage).  
This theory assumes that labour is the only factor of production in two countries, 
with zero transport cost, and no trade barriers within the countries. This theory 
can be understood better from the example cited in Table 1.4.  
Suppose there are two countries, A and B, producing two commodities, wheat 
and rice, with labour as the only factor of production. Now assume that both the 
countries have 200 labourers and use 100 labourers to produce wheat and 100 
labourers to produce rice. 
Table
 1.4 Production of wheat and rice by Country A and B before the trade 
 Country A (in tons) Country B (in tons) 
Wheat 20 15 
Rice 40 10 
Table 1.4 shows that country A can produce 20 units; whereas, country B can 
produce 15 units of wheat by employing the same number (100) of labourers. In 
addition, country A can produce 40 units; whereas country‟ B can produce 10 
units of rice by employing 100 labourers. 


--- Page 19 ---
 
 
 
18 
Theory of 
International Trade 
Thus, country A has an absolute advantage in producing both items. Country A 
employs the same number of labourers (100 labourers in the production of each 
item) in producing rice and wheat; however, rice production is higher than wheat 
production. This reveals that country A has a comparative advantage in 
producing rice. Similarly, country B also employs the same number of labourers 
(100 labourers in producing each good) in manufacturing wheat and rice; but, its 
wheat production is more than rice. It indicates that country B has a comparative 
advantage in producing wheat. 
For example, country A has decided to produce 60 units of rice by employing 
150 labourers. It uses 50 labourers to produce 10 units of wheat. On the other 
hand, country B has decided to use all the 200 labourers to produce 30 units of 
wheat and stop the production of rice. In this situation, country A exchanges 14 
units of rice with 14 units of wheat produced by country B. (see Table 1.5).  
Table
 1.5 Production after specialization 
 Country A Country B 
Wheat 10 30 
Rice 60 0 
Table 1.6 Situation after the trade takes place 
 Country A Country B 
Wheat 24 16 
Rice 46 14 
It can be understood from Table 1.6 that both countries have benefitted or gained 
from trade. Before the trade, country A had only 20 units of wheat and 40 units 
of rice; after the trade, country A had 24 units of wheat and 46 units of rice. 
At the same time, country B has 15 units of wheat and 10 units of rice before the 
trade, while it has 16 units of wheat and 14 units of rice after the trade. Therefore, 
comparative advantage theory clarifies that trade can create benefits for both 
participating countries even if one country has an absolute advantage in the 
production of both commodities.  
Thus, it is clear from the above theories that the mercantilists believed that one 
nation could gain only at the expense of another nation and advocated strict 
government control and regulations of all economic activities. Adam Smith 
believed that all nations would gain from free trade and strongly advocated a 
policy of laissez-faire (i.e., as little government interference with the economic 
system as possible).  Free trade would cause world resources to be utilized most 
efficiently and would maximize world welfare.  There were to be only a few 
exceptions to this policy of laissez-faire and free trade.  One of these was the 
protection of industries important for national defence. 


--- Page 20 ---
 
 
 
19 
Classical and Neo-
Classical Theories of 
International Trade 
Check Your Progress 2 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Explain the central proposition of the absolute advantage theory and 
comparative advantage theory. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Differentiate between Adam Smith and Ricardo‟s theory of international 
trade. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3)  With reference to the Ricardian theory of international trade, explain how 
nations gain from trade. 
…………………………………………………………
………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
1.5  HECKSCHER -OHLIN THEORY 
In the preceding section, we have seen that the difference in relative commodity 
prices between two nations is the reason for their comparative advantage, which 
forms the basis for mutually beneficial trade. Then we explained the reason, or 
cause, for the difference in relative commodity prices and comparative advantage 
between the two nations. The second way we extend our trade model is to 
analyze the effect of international trade on the earnings of factors of production 
in the two trading nations. That is, we want to examine the effect of international 
trade on the earnings of labour as well as on international differences in earnings. 
These two important questions were left largely unanswered by Smith, Ricardo, 
and Mill. According to classical economists, the comparative advantage was 
based on the difference in the productivity of labour among nations, but they did 
not explain such a difference in productivity, except for possible differences in 
climate. The Heckscher –Ohlin theory goes much beyond that by extending the 
trade model of the previous sections to examine the basis for comparative 
advantage and the effect that trade has on factor earnings in the two nations. 
(Salvatore 2013) 


--- Page 21 ---
 
 
 
20 
Theory of 
International Trade 
Bertil Ohlin has advocated the Modern Theory of international trade. Ohlin has 
drawn his ideas from Eli Heckscher's General Equilibrium Analysis. Hence it is 
also known as Heckscher Ohlin (H-O) Theory.  
Heckscher-Ohlin theory begins where the Ricardian theory of international trade 
ends. The Ricardian theory states that the basis of international trade is the 
comparative or relative cost differences. But he did not explain how this 
comparative cost difference emerges. Ohlin‟s theory explains the real cause of 
this difference.  
Ohlin states that trade takes place due to the different relative prices of different 
goods in different countries. The difference in the relative price of a commodity 
is due to differences in the relative costs and factor prices in different countries. 
According to the H-O theory, the differences in factor prices are due to 
differences in factor endowments in different countries. The trade pattern is 
explained in terms of differences in relative factor endowments i.e., the relative 
resource supply in an economy. Ohlin‟s theory is also described as the factor 
endowment theory. Ohlin‟s theory is usually expounded in terms of a two -factor 
model with labour and capital as the two factors of endowments. Trade occurs 
due to the differences in factor endowments. Some countries have plenty of 
capital, while others have an abundance of labour. The Heckscher-Ohlin theorem 
postulates that countries rich in labour will export labour-intensive goods and 
countries with plenty of capital will export capital-intensive products. 
Heckscher-Ohlin's theory explains the modern approach to international trade 
based on the following assumptions: - 
1) There are two countries involved, countries A and B 
2) There are two factors of production, labour and capital. 
3) There are two goods, X and Y, of which X is labour-intensive, and Y is 
capital-intensive. 
4) Country A is a labour
-abundant country В is capital-rich. 
5) There is perfect competition in both the commodity and factor markets. 
6) All production functions are homogeneous of the first degree. Hence there are 
constant returns to the scale. 
7) There are no transport costs or other impediments to trade. 
8) Demand conditions are identical in both countries. 
These assumptions have been made to explain the meaning of comparative price 
advantage or relative price difference and to deduce the major propositions of the 
factor endowment theory. Given these assumptions, Ohlin‟s thesis contends that, 
country exports goods which use relatively a greater proportion of its relatively 
abundant and thus cheap factors. It is implied that trade occurs because 
differences in relative commodity prices are caused by differences in relative 
factor prices (thus a comparative advantage) because of differences in the factor 
endowments among the countries. 
