--- Page 41 ---
 
 
 
40 
Theory of 
International Trade 
The gain will be more for B than for A. On the contrary, if B’s demand for X 
commodity is less  elastic, the terms of trade will be closer to the domestic 
exchange ratio of country B: 1 unit of X = 1.5 unit of Y. The terms of trade, 
in this situation, will be favourable for A and against B. Country A will have 
a larger share out of the gains from trade than country B. 
The distribution of gains from trade can be explained  in terms of the 
Marshall-Edgeworth offer curve through Fig. 2.3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.3: Marshall-Edgeworth offer curve 
In Fig. 2.3., OC and OD are the domestic exchange ratio lines of countries A  
and B respectively. OA is the offer curve of country A a nd OB is the offer 
curve of country B. The exchange takes place at P where the two offer curves 
cut each other. Country A imports PQ quantity of Y and exports OQ quantity 
of X. 
The terms of trade for country A at P = (QY/QX) = (PQ/OQ) = Slope of Line 
OP. If the line OP gets closer to OD, the terms of trade become favourable to 
country A and unfavourable to country B. On the opposite, if the line OP gets 
closer to the line OC, the domestic exchange ratio line of country A, the 
terms of trade turn against country A and become favourable to country B. 
Country A was willing to exchange before trade SQ units of Y for OQ units 
of X. After the trade, it gets PQ units of Y for OQ units of X. Therefore, the 
gain from trade for country A, out of the total trade gain o f RS, amounts to 
PQ – SQ = PS units of Y. In the case of country B, RQ units of Y were being 
exchanged for OQ units of X before the trade. 
However, after trade it has to part with only PQ units of Y to import OQ units 
of X. Therefore, the gain from trade for this country amounts to RQ – PQ = 
RP units of Y. As the point of exchange, P gets closer to the line OD, the 
share of country A in the gain from trade will rise and  that of country B will 
fall and vice-versa. 
R 
Y – 
Commodity 
(B’s 
Exportable) 
Y 
X- Commodity 
(A’s Exportable) 
 
 O 
 X 
S 
P 
Q 
D 
A 
B 
C 


--- Page 42 ---
 
 
 
41 
Gains from 
Trade 4) Taussig’s Approach: 
According to Taussig, trading country gains from trade in form of a rise in 
income. As the demand for labour increases because of increase in exports, 
employers offer higher wages to attract more labour in this industry. The spill 
over effect of rise in wages in one industry is that other industries will also 
have to offer higher wages to retain talent. Thus international trade, according 
to Taussig will lead to a general rise in money incomes. A higher level of 
income due to trade enables the people of a country to make larger purchases 
of both domestically produced and  imported goods and  reach a higher level 
of welfare. 
5) Modern Approach: 
The modern theorists considered the gains from trade as the gains resulting 
from: 
i) Gains from exchange and  
ii) Gains from specialisation. 
These two gains together constitute the gains from international trade. When 
trade take place between countries, consumers enjoy a higher level of 
satisfaction, partly because of improvement in terms of trade and partly on 
account of greater specialisation in the use  of economic resources of the 
country. These two types of gains from trade can be shown in Fig. 2.4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.4: Gains from trade 
I2 
Y – Commodity 
Y 
X- Commodity 
 
 O 
 X 
A 
F 
P0 
P2 
P1 
C1 
I3 
I1 
P0 
P1 
A1 
D 
D1 
E 
C 


--- Page 43 ---
 
 
 
42 
Theory of 
International Trade In Fig. 2.4., X -commodity is measured along the horizontal scale and  
Y-commodity is measured along the vertical scale. AA 1 is the production 
possibility curve. P 0P0 is the domestic price ratio line. It is tangent to the 
production possibility curve at E. Thus, E is the point of production 
equilibrium in the absence of trade. 
E is also the point of consumption equilibrium because P 0P0 is tangent to the 
community indifference curve I 1 at this point. When  trade commences, P 1P1 
is the international exchange ratio line, which is tangent to the production 
possibility curve at F and the community indifference curve I3 at C1. 
Thus, F is the point of production and  C1 is the point of consumption. After 
trade takes place,  D 1F of X-commodity is exported and  C 1D1 quantity of  
Y-commodity is imported. The trade causes two types of shifts in the country. 
First, the production point shifts from E to F. It occurs because of 
specialisation in the production of X-commodity and  specialisation in factor 
use. This can be called the production effect. Second, the point of 
consumption shifts from E at I 1 to C 1 at the higher community indifference 
curve I3. It means an increase in the satisfaction of the commodity. This can 
be called the consumption effect. Both together signify the gain from 
international trade. 
If a line P 2E is drawn parallel to P1P1 from the original equilibrium situation 
E, it signifies that  there is no  change in production, but the consumption 
equilibrium shifts from E to C at a higher community indifference curve I2. In 
this situation, the CD quantity of Y is imported at a lower international price 
of Y. The quantity of X-commodity exported in exchange for CD quantity of 
Y is DE. Although production is the same as at point E, the consumption 
equilibrium shifting from E to C signifies the gain from trade. This is the 
trade gain from the exchange. 
After the trade, as the specialisation in production and  optimum factor use 
takes place, the production equilibrium shifts from E to F along the same 
production possibility curve and  the consumption equilibrium shifts to C1. In 
this situation, C 1D1 quantity of Y is imported and  D 1F quantity of X is 
exported. As a result of specialisation in production after the trade, the shift in 
consumption equilibrium from C to C 1 reflects the trade gain from  
specialisation. 
To sum up, the total gain from trade is comprised of gain from  the exchange 
and the gain from  specialization. The total gain from  trade can be measured 
by the movement from E to C1. This movement takes place in two steps—the 
movement from E to C is the gain from the exchange and the movement from 
C to C1 is the gain from specialization. 
 
 


--- Page 44 ---
 
 
 
43 
Gains from 
Trade Another Example: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.5: Gains from specialisation in production 
If Nation 1 could not specialize in the production of X with the opening of 
trade but continued to produce at point A, Nation 1 could export 20X in 
exchange for 20Y at the prevailing world price of P W= 1 and end up 
consuming at point T on indifference curve II. The increase in consumption 
from point A (in autarky) to point T represents the gains from exchange 
alone. If Nation 1 subsequently did specialize in the production of X and 
produced at point B, it would then consume at point E on indifference curve 
III. The increase in consumption from T to E would represent the gains from 
specialization in production. 
6) Gains 
from Trade for Large Country versus Small Country: 
H.R. Heller explained how entire gains go to a small country instead of large 
country under the conditions of constant opportunity cost and  unchanged 
terms of trade. This case can be explained in Fig. 2.6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2.6. (i) & 2.6. (ii): Gains from Trade for Large Country and Small Country 
E 
Y 
 Nation 1 
 
 0 
 X 
B 
III 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
10 
 30 
 50 
 70 
 90 
 110 
 130 
 150 
PW = 1 
   PB =PW = 1 
T 
II 
A 
X 
I 
R 
Y – Commodity 
Y 
X- Commodity 
 O 
S 
A1 
Country A 
A 
(i) 
P 
I1 
X 
R1 
Y – Commodity 
Y 
X- Commodity 
 O 
 B2 
Country B 
B 
(ii) 
R2 
T 
I2 
B1 


--- Page 45 ---
 
 
 
44 
Theory of 
International Trade In Fig. 2.6.  (i) For a large country A, the production possibility curve under the 
conditions of constant costs is AA1. In the absence of trade, consumption and  
production take place at R where the community indifference curve I is tangent to 
the production possibility curve. After trade takes place,  there is no change in 
terms of trade for country A so that the international price ratio line remains AA1. 
This country will, however, modify its production pattern in such a way that  
some imports are made from country B. It may decide to move to P where it 
exports PS quantity of X commodity and  imports SR quantity of Y. Since the 
terms of trade remain unchanged for country A, it fails to make any gain from 
trade. 
In Fig. 2.6 . (ii), for the small country B, the production possibility curve or 
domestic price ratio line under constant cost conditions is BB1. Its tangency with 
the community indifference curve I 1 shows that production and  consumption 
equilibrium in this country, in  the absence of trade, takes place at R 1. As trade 
commences, this country specialises completely in the production of Y 
commodity. The international price ratio line is BB2, which  is parallel to AA1. 
This country produces at B. The consumption equilibrium occurs at R1. 
So, after trade it exports TR 2 (= SR) of Y commodity to country A and imports 
BT (= PS) quantity of X from country A. The movement from R 1 to R 2 in 
country B reflects the gain from specialisation and exchange to the small country 
B from the  international trade. Since this country can import X -commodity at a 
lower international price, the terms of trade turn in favour of it. That also shows 
that the gains from trade go to small country B alone and the large country goes 
without any gain from trade.  
2.7  POTENTIAL AND ACTUAL GAIN FROM 
TRADE 
Domestic cost ratios of producing two  commodities X and  Y determines the 
potential gain from trade for the two trading countries A and B. 
Thus, 
GP = (
  
  
)
 
  (
  
  
)
 
 
Where G P = potential gain C X =  cost per unit (money or labour) for X 
commodity, C Y =  Cost per unit (money or labour) for Y commodity. The 
subscripts ‘A’ and ‘B’ signify the two countries.  
The actual gain from trade G a, on the other hand, is determined by the difference 
in price ratio of the two commodities X and Y in the two countries.  
Thus,  
Ga = (
  
  
)
 
  (
  
  
)
 
 


--- Page 46 ---
 
 
 
45 
Gains from 
Trade Under the conditions of perfect competition and free trade, the cost ratio equals 
the price ration of two commodities in each country such that  
  
  
   
  
 
Consequently the actual gain becomes equal to potential gain  
GP = Ga 
In absence of tariffs and other trade restrictions, actual gains are equal to 
potential gains of the country. In case of presence of imperfect competition or 
trade and tariff restrictions, the price ratio (P X/PY) is more than the cost ratio 
(CX/CY) of a country. Thus, the actual gain from trade exceeds the potential tra de 
gain (Ga > GP). 
2.8  FREE TRADE VERSUS NO TRADE 
When there are no tariffs or trade restrictions, it is called a situation of free trade.  
In situation of free trade,  domestic factor and product prices get equalised with 
international prices. 
Assumptions: 
The proposition that  free trade is superior to no trade is proved based on  the 
following assumptions: 
a) There is a situation of perfect competition in the market. 
b) The government does not interfere in trade i.e. there are no tariffs, quotas and 
subsidies. 
c) There are no transportation costs. 
d) The given country is small in size and has no monopoly power in trade. 
e) The factors of production are fixed in supply. 
f) The technology is such that the production possibility curve is concave to the 
origin. 
Based on the assumptions given above, it is possible to show that free 
international trade is much superior to autarchy (absence of trade). The diagram, 
to demonstrate it, is adapted from the diagram given by Jagdish Bhagwati. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 47 ---
 
 
 
46 
Theory of 
International Trade  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.7: Benefits of free trade vs. no trade 
In Fig. 2.7  AB is the production possibility curve of the home country. In the 
absence of trade, the domestic price ratio is given by the line DD. C is the point 
of production and consumption equilibrium. As the trade commences and there is 
no restriction on  trade, the international price ratio is given by the slope of the 
line EE which runs parallel to DD. The line EE represents the Consumption 
Possibility Curve. 
EE determines the new availability frontier in the country. Point R, where the 
consumption possibility curve is tangent to the production possibility curve, 
represents the most efficient production point. Consumption point on the other 
hand is determined at C1 where the international price ratio line EE is tangent to 
the higher community indifference curve I 2. Since after free trade, the production 
is optimised at R and consumption is optimised at C1, it follows that free trade is 
superior to no trade. 
2.9  STATIC AND DYNAMIC GAINS 
The gains from international trade are of two types: 
1)  Static Gains & Dynamics Gains  
 The static gains from trade are as under: 
i) Division of labour, specialization and Expansion in Production : 
International trade accord the benefit of division of labour and 
specialization. It ensures that all the available productive resources in the 
country are optimally utilized leading to expansion in production of the 
firm, country and the world. 
ii)  Improved Welfare : Increased production because of international trade 
leads to improved welfare in the trading countries. Quality of the products 
also improves due to specialisation by a country. Quality along with easy 
access at a lower costs directly boosts welfare of the people. 
C 
Y - 
Commodity 
Y 
X- Commodity 
 O 
 X 
A 
D 
E 
I1 
R 
B 
 D 
 E 
I2 
C1 


--- Page 48 ---
 
 
 
47 
Gains from 
Trade As Ricardo points out "The extension of international trade very 
powerfully contributes to increasing the mass  commodities and,  
therefore, the sum of enjoyments." 
iii) Increase in National Income : International trade leading to 
expansion of production in the trading countries helps to generate 
more and more employment opportunities. Increase in production 
and employment leads to a rise in the national income of the 
trading countries. 
iv) Vent for Surplus : According to Adam Smith, international trade 
leads to the fullest utilisation of productive resources of the 
country. The surplus created because of increased efficiency and  
increased production can be utilized through sales in the foreign 
market. 
2)  Dynamic Gains from Trade: 
The major dynamic gains from international trade are as follows: 
i)  Technological Development : International trade facilitates transfer of 
advanced technology from developed to less  developed countries. It 
stimulates innovations and  inventions which  in turn bring efficiency in 
production and reduces overall cost. Latest and  advanced techniques are 
transferred to other countries through trade. 
ii)  Increased Competition : Along with other benefits, international trade 
brings in efficiencies in all the industries in trading countries. It creates 
the environment of competition ultimately leading to increased quality of 
goods. 
iii)  Expansion of Market: International trade leads to expansion in the size 
of the market. It encourages producers to expand the scale of production 
which in turn leads to the increased volume of investment and 
employment. Increased investment and  employment ultimately lead to 
expansion in the market. 
iii) Increase in Investment : As the demand for home-produced goods 
increases due to international trade, there is a strong impetus for 
investment. The growth of the export sector leads to the expansion of 
several allied ancillary industries creating more and  more opportunities 
for investment. There is also a substantial increase in foreign direct 
investments in the export sector of the economy. 
v)  Optimum Use of Resources : International trade leads to more efficient 
use of all the productive resources.  
Ellsworth and Clark Leith summed up  the dynamic  gain from trade in these 
words, "Trade is a dynamic force that  stimulates innovation. New ways of 
producing and organising production are spread to the local economy through 


--- Page 49 ---
 
 
 
48 
Theory of 
International Trade 
trade and the competitive force of trade stimulates the adoption of cost-saving 
techniques. Trade also makes possible economical local production of many 
goods that would be prohibitive to produce locally." 
Check Your Progress 3 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  In what circumstances might a country NOT benefit from trade with another 
country? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) What are static and dynamic gains from trade? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3)  Explain Mill's approach to measuring gains from trade. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
4)   Why is ‘free trade’ between two countries is considered to be better than ‘no 
trade’? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2.10  LET US SUM UP 
After reading this unit, we learnt : 
a) To maximize the value of its output, a country must be producing a 
combination of goods and services that lies on its production possibilities 
curve. 
b) Suppose two countries each produce two goods and their opportunity costs 
differ. If this is the case, there is an opportunity for trade between the two 
countries that will leave both better off. 
c) International trade leads countries to specialize in goods and services in 
which they have a comparative advantage. 


--- Page 50 ---
 
 
 
49 
Gains from 
Trade d) The terms of trade determine the extent to which each country will specialize. 
Each will increase the production of the good or service in which it has a 
comparative advantage up to the point where the opportunity cost of 
producing it equals the terms of trade. 
e) Free international trade can increase the availability of various goods and 
services in the countries that participate in it. Trade between the countries 
allow consuming combinations of goods and services which they would not 
be able to produce. 
f) While free trade increases the availability of total quantity of goods and 
services to each country, in short run, there might be winners and losers. 
2.11  KEYWORDS 
Autarky  The absence of trade; economic isolation 
Absolute Advantage The greater efficiency that one nation may have 
over another in the production of a commodity. It 
describes a situation in which a country can 
produce more of a good or service than any other 
with the same quantity of resources. According to 
Adam Smith, this is the basis for trade. 
The basis for Trade The forces (absolute advantage for Adam Smith 
and Comparative Advantage for Ricardo). 
Specialisation When a country allocates most or all its resources 
towards the production of a particular good or 
service. For example, Bangladesh specializes in 
producing textiles. 
Gains from Trade The increase in each nation’s consumption 
resulting from specialization in production and 
trade. 
Terms of Trade The price of one good in terms of the other that two 
countries agree to trade at. Beneficial terms of trade 
allow a country to import a good at a lower 
opportunity cost than the cost for them to produce 
the good domestically, thus the country gains from 
trade. In other words, it's the ratio of the price of a 
nation's export commodity to the price of its import 
commodity. When more than two commodities are 
traded, we use the index of export to import prices. 
Terms of trade are usually given in percentages. 
Consumption Frontier The various alternative combinations of the two 
commodities that a nation can consume. 


--- Page 51 ---
 
 
 
50 
Theory of 
International Trade Marginal rate of 
Transformation (MRT) 
The amount of one commodity that a nation must 
give up to get more units of a second commodity. 
This is another name of the opportunity cost of a 
commodity. To be more precise, marginal rate of 
transformation shows the number of goods which 
will be given up by a country to produce an 
additional unit of other goods while keeping the 
factors of production constant. 
Production Possibilities 
Curve 
It is a graph which shows various combinations 
of output that a country can produce by applying 
its best available resources and technology. In 
other words, A curve that shows the various 
alternative combinations of the two commodities 
that a nation can produce by completely  utilising 
all its factors of production with the best 
available technology. This curve is also known 
as the transformation curve or the production 
frontier.  
Opportunity Cost Theory This opportunity cost theory states that the cost 
of one commodity is the amount of another 
commodity that must be given up by a country to 
release just enough factors of production or 
resources to enable the production of one 
additional unit of t he first commodity. To be 
more precise, if a country can produce either 
commodity A or B, the opportunity cost of 
commodity A is the amount of the other 
commodity B that must be given up to get one 
additional unit of commodity A. 
Constant Opportunity 
Costs 
It occurs when the opportunity cost stays the 
same as a country increase its production of one 
good. This shows that the resources are easily 
accommodated or changed from the production 
of one good to the production of another good. 
To be more precise, c onstant opportunity costs 
theory occurs when the equal amount of one 
commodity that a nation give up releasing just 
enough resources to produce each additional unit 
of another commodity. 
Increasing Opportunity 
Costs 
It describes how opportunity costs for a country 
increase as resources are applied. According to 
the law of increasing opportunity costs, as one 
good is produced, the opportunity cost to 
