--- Page 31 ---
 
 
 
30 
Theory of 
International Trade UNIT 2  GAINS FROM TRADE  
Structure 
2.0  Objectives 
2.1  Introduction 
2.2  Meaning of Gains from Trade 
2.3  Sources of Gains 
2.4  Factors Determining Size of Gains 
2.5  Production Possibilities Curve in International trade 
2.6  Measurement of Gains from Trade 
2.7  Potential and Actual Gain 
 
2.8.  Free Trade versus  No Trade 
2.9  Static and Dynamic Gains 
2.10  Let us Sum up 
2.11  Key Words 
2.12  Some Useful books 
2.13  Answers/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises  
2.0  OBJECTIVES 
After studying this Unit, you should be able to:  
 explain the meaning of gains from international trade and sources of such 
gains; 
 identify the conditions under which two countries can gain from trading with 
each other; 
 elucidate and illustrate how the terms of trade determine the extent to which 
each country specializes; and 
 explain and illustrate the mutual benefits of trade. 
2.1   INTRODUCTION 
As we have discussed in the previous unit, international trade refers to the 
voluntary exchange of goods and services between different countries. Trade 
between countries will only occur if they consider it beneficial to their interests. 
                                                 
 Contributed by  Dr. Shyam Sundar, Sr. General Manager - Policy Advisory, Mahindra Group  


--- Page 32 ---
 
 
 
31 
Gains from 
Trade The previous unit briefly discussed about why do countries trade? In this unit, we 
shall elaborate the concept of gains from international trade.  
In this connection, the meaning of gains from trade will be discussed followed by 
sources of gains and factors determining gains from trade. Thereafter, we shall 
discuss the concept of the Production Possibilities Curve which shows all the 
various alternative combinations of the two commodities that a country can 
produce by completely utilising all its factors of production with the best 
available technology. 
Subsequently, we will explain how gains from trade can be measured. Which 
imply how each nation gains from international trade by exchange and 
specialisation in the production? 
Lastly, we analyse the various situations of the potential and actual gain, Free 
Trade vs. no trade and static and dynamic gains.
  
2.2  MEANING OF GAINS FROM TRADE 
Gains from international trade refer to the various benefits which country derived 
by way of trading of goods and services with other countries. Such benefits from 
trade are because of international division of labour and specialisation. Countries 
trade with each other because trade is beneficial to all. Basic motivation of trade 
is the gain or benefit that nations accrue over the period. Each trading country 
gains when the total output increases as a result of the division of labour and 
specialisation. In the case of autarky or isolation, the benefits of the international 
division of labour do not flow between nations. 
Malthus held that ‘the gain from trade consisted of the increased value which 
results from exchanging what is wanted less for what is wanted more, and that 
'international trade, by giving us commodities much better suited to our wants 
and tastes than those which had been sent away, has decidedly increased the 
exchangeable value of our possessions, our means of enjoyment, and our wealth’. 
In simple words, gains from trade refers to additional production and 
consumption effects that countries can achieve by way of entering trade with 
each other. To sum-up, gains from international trade are of two types –i) gain 
from exchange and ii) gain from specialisation in production. Approaches 
preferred by various economists will be discussed in subsequent sections.
  
2.3  SOURCES OF GAINS 
As per classical theory, major source of gains from international trade arises out 
of specialisation based on the principle of comparative cost advantage. While 
pointing out the 'division of labour’, Adam Smith has held that it is limited by the 
size of the market. Upon expansion of the market size because of international 
trade, the scope for large-scale production also increases which in turn increases 
the scope for complex division of labour and specialisation. In short, international 


--- Page 33 ---
 
 
 
32 
Theory of 
International Trade 
trade leads to enlargement of the market which further leads to specialisation and 
division of labour. This process further results in an increase in output per unit of 
input.  
The comparative cost theory exhibits increased world production as gains from 
international trade in the real-world scenario. Each trading country gains by way 
of getting relatively more, better and cheaper goods. In the entire process no 
country lose by having less than what they needed. 
In this way we can say that gains from trade are results of specialization in 
production from the division of labour, economies of scale, and agglomeration 
along with relative availability of factor resources.  
When there is free trade, goods and services produced all over the world are 
available to people everywhere. In other words, international trade makes 
available to the people of a country, a galaxy of goods and services at the most 
competitive prices. A country may not have the factor endowments or 
technological capability to produce certain goods. If there is no trade with other 
countries, it will have to do without such goods but through international trade, it 
can procure them. 
The gains from international trade may be summed up as follows: 
i) Expansion of the size of the market 
ii) Division of labour 
iii) Gains from specialisation 
iv) Gains from increased product variety 
v) Gains from competition 
vi) Gains from increased economies of scale 
vii) Productivity gains. 
2.4  FACTORS DETERMINING SIZE OF GAINS 
Differences in cost ratios:  if country A has a comparative advantage in the 
production of wheat and country B has a comparative advantage in the 
production of cotton, both countries will gain from trade. The size of the gain 
will depend on the cost of production of each commodity in both countries. The 
gain from international trade depends upon the cost ratios of differences in 
comparative cost ratios in the two trading countries. The larger the difference 
between exchange rate and cost of production the larger the gains from trade and 
vice versa. 
1) Reciprocal demand: The reciprocal demand means the relative strength and 
elasticity of demand of one country for the product of the other in exchange 
for its product. 


--- Page 34 ---
 
 
 
33 
Gains from 
Trade 2) Level of income: The level of money income of a country is another factor 
which determines the gains and the share of trade. A country whose goods 
have constant demand in other countries will have a high level of money 
income.  
3) Terms of trade (also called “trading price”): It is the most important factor 
which determines the gains from trade. The international terms of trade refer 
to the rate at which one commodity of a country is exchanged for another 
commodity of the other country. If the cost ratio and terms of trade are closer 
to each other, more will be the gains from the trade of the participating 
countries. 
4) Productive efficiency: An increase in the productive efficiency of a country 
also determines its gains from trade. It lowers the costs of production and 
prices of goods in the home country. As a result, the other country gains by 
importing cheap goods and its terms of trade improve. 
5) Nature of commodities exported:  Another factor is the nature of 
commodities exported by a country.  A country that exports mainly primary 
p
roducts has unfavourable terms of trade. Consequently, it gains from trade 
will be smaller.  On the contrary, a country exporting manufactured goods 
has favourable terms of trade and its gain from trade will be larger. 
6) Technological conditions: In a country which is technologically advanced 
and has an abundance of capital, its volume of foreign trade will be large and 
so it will gain from international trade.  On the other hand, if a country is 
technologically backward with abundant labour, its volume of foreign trade 
will be small and so will be gains from trade. 
7) Size of the country:  If a country is small, it is relatively easy for them to 
specialize in the production of one commodity and export the surplus 
production to a large country and can get more gains from international trade. 
Whereas if a country is large, then they must specialise in more than one 
good because the excess production of only one commodity cannot be 
exported fully to a small-sized country as the demand for the commodity will 
reduce very frequently. So, the smaller the size of the country, the larger the 
gains from trade. 
8) Factor availability:  International trade is based on specialization and a 
country specializes depending upon the availability of factors of production. 
It will increase the domestic cost ratios and thereby the gains from trade. 
9) Productive Efficiency: An increase in the productive efficiency of a country 
also determines its gains from trade. A highly efficient country can keep the 
cost of production and price of the goods lower than other countries.  


--- Page 35 ---
 
 
 
34 
Theory of 
International Trade 
Check Your Progress 1 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Why do countries trade with each other? What are the gains from trade? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Examine the main source of gains from trade? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) How do the gains from trade help an economy grow? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2.5 PRODUCTION POSSIBILITIES CURVE IN 
INTERNATIONAL TRADE 
Production Possibilities Curve (also known as production frontier, transformation 
curve, product substitution curve or an opportunity cost curve) shows all the 
various alternative combinations of the two commodities that a nation can 
produce by fully utilizing all its factors of production with the best available 
technology.  
The slope of the production possibilities curve refers to the marginal rate of 
transformation (MRT) or the amount of a commodity that the nation must give up 
to get one additional unit of the second commodity.  
If the nation faces constant costs or MRT, then its production possibilities curve 
is a straight line with an (absolute) slope equal to the constant opportunity costs 
or MRT and the relative commodity price in the nation. 
The country lacks the capacity beyond the limit specified by the production 
possibility curve. It shows the production frontier of the country. 
Producing output beyond the production frontier is not possible. If the output of 
the two or one of the two commodities is below the production frontier, that 
indicates unemployment or excess capacity. To be more specific, consider a 
situation when the production of Y commodity is reduced to produce more units 
of X commodity, it signifies that Y has been transformed or substituted into X-
commodity. Therefore, it is called an opportunity cost curve, transformation 
curve or product substitution curve. 


--- Page 36 ---
 
 
 
35 
Gains from 
Trade Example: When all the available resources are employed in production of only 
one commodity say commodity X, commodity X can be produced at maximum 
possible level without any production of another commodity say Y. On the 
opposite, if all the resources are utilised in the production of Y, the country will 
be able to produce maximum quantity of Y commodity with no output of X 
commodity. Between these two extreme situations, there can be various 
production possibilities involving more or fewer quantities of the two 
commodities. If the production of X is to be increased, there will be a diversion 
of resources from the production of Y to the production of X, resulting in reduced 
production of Y. 
MRT is the ratio of a change in the quantity of commodity Y to a change in the 
quantity of X commodity. 
MRTxy = δy/δx 
Since additional production of X involves reduced output of Y, the MRT is 
negative. It signifies that the production possibility curve or opportunity cost 
curve slopes negatively, or it slopes downwards from left to right. 
The MRT xy can be expressed also as a ratio of the marginal cost of X to the 
marginal cost of Y. 
It can be determined as below: 
δC = MCx. δx + MCy. δy 
Where δC = Change in cost, δx = Change in the quantity of X commodity, δy = 
Change in the quantity of Y commodity. MC and MC are the marginal costs of X 
and Y commodities respectively. 
If   
δC = 0 
MCx. δx + MCy. δy = 0 
MCx. δx  = - MCy. δy 
   
   
     
  
 
or  MRTxy =  
  
  
 = 
   
   
 
If the production is governed by constant returns, the MC x relative to MC y 
remains unchanged or MRT xy remains the same. It means the slope of the 
production possibility curve or opportunity cost curve is the same and it is a 
negatively sloping straight line. If the production is governed by diminishing 
returns, MC X rises relative to the MC y. It signifies that the slope or MRT xy 
increases. In such a situation, the opportunity cost curve is a negatively sloping 
concave curve to the origin. If the production is governed by increasing returns, 
the MC X decreases relative to the MC y. The slope or MRT xy decreases. In this 


--- Page 37 ---
 
 
 
36 
Theory of 
International Trade 
case, the opportunity cost curve is a negatively sloping convex curve to the 
origin. These cases are depicted in Fig. 2.1 (a), 2.1 (b) and 2.1(c) respectively.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.1(a), 2.1(b) and 2.1 (c) 
The opportunity cost curve simply indicates the alternative production 
possibilities. It does not show what combinations of the two commodities will be 
produced. 
In Fig. 2.1, AB is the production possibility curve or the opportunity cost curve. 
In Fig. 2
.1 (a), the opportunity cost curve AB is the negatively sloping straight 
line. Along this curve, MRTxy= - δy/δx = MCx/MCy remains unchanged due to 
constant opportunity cost conditions (constant return) 
In Fig. 2.1 (b), the opportunity cost curve AB is negatively concave. Along it, 
MRTxy = - δy/δx = MCx/MCy increasing opportunity cost condition 
(diminishing returns).  
In Fig. 2.1 (c), the opportunity cost curve AB is a negatively sloping convex 
curve to the origin on account of decreasing opportunity cost condition 
(increasing returns). 
O 
L* 
 Labour 
B 
X Commodity  
Y Commodity 
A 
Y 
O 
X 
(a) 
B 
X 
Commodity  
Y Commodity 
A 
Y 
O 
X 
(b) 
B 
X Commodity  
Y Commodity 
A 
Y 
O 
X 
(c) 


--- Page 38 ---
 
 
 
37 
Gains from 
Trade Check Your Progress 2 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Why is the production possibilities curve of each nation usually different? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Is trade still possible between two nations if they have identical production 
possibilities curves? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3)  Under what conditions can no trade take place between two nations with 
different production possibility curves? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
4)  What happens if two nations are identical in every respect? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2.6  MEASUREMENT OF GAINS FROM TRADE    
Jacob Viner pointed out that  the gains from trade were measured by the classical 
economists in terms of: 
i) An increase in national income, 
ii) Differences in comparative costs, and 
iii) Terms of trade. 
Some approaches to the concept of gains from trade and  their measurement are 
discussed below: 
1) Adam Smith’s Approach: 
According to Adam Smith, international trade helps to improve the 
productive capacity of trading nations. It increases value of the product as 
excess of a product in domestic market can be exported. A nation can also 
import products which are high in demand in domestic market. Thus,  gains 


--- Page 39 ---
 
 
 
38 
Theory of 
International Trade 
from international trade are in form of maximum welfare through maximum 
possible export earnings. 
A country reaches the point of optimum allocation as each country specializes 
in production of a commodity in which it has cost advantage. Specialization 
results in economies of scale i.e., reduced cost of the product.  
2) Ricardo-Malthus Approach: 
In unit 1,  we have discussed about Comparative advantage theory. You can 
recall that  Ricardo asserted that  principle of comparative costs in 
international trade results in saving costs and resources.In the words of David 
Ricardo, ―The advantage to both places is not that they have any increase in 
value but with the same amount of value they are both able to consume and  
enjoy an increased quantity of commodities."  
Malthus had expressed in this regard views  similar to those of Adam Smith. 
The gain from trade, according to him, consists of "the increased value, 
which results from exchanging what is wanted less for what is wanted more." 
The international exchange on this basis increases the "exchangeable value of 
our possession, our means of enjoyment and our wealth." 
The Ricardo-Malthus approach to gains from trade was illustrated by Ronald 
Findlay in Fig. 2.2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.2: The Ricardo-Malthus approach to gains from trade 
In Fig. 2.2., AB is the production possibility curve under constant cost 
conditions before the trade. Suppose the production takes place at E. If this 
country enters into trade, the international exchange ratio line shifts to A 1B 
and
 production of two commodities X and Y now takes place at C. The 
production at point C will be possible if the labour input increases an extent 
that the production possibility curve shifts to A2B2. The gain from trade will 
be measured by BB2/OB. 
 
C 
Y - 
Commodity 
Y 
X- Commodity 
 O 
 X 
I 
A 
A3 
A2 
A1 
E 
D 
B 
 B3 
 B2 


--- Page 40 ---
 
 
 
39 
Gains from 
Trade Malthus criticized this measure of gain from trade as exaggerated. According 
to him, if the production possibility curve shifts to A 2B2, point C cannot be 
the point of equilibrium. The relative pric es along A 2B2 are more favourable  
to the export good X than along the line A 1B. Some points to the right of C 
rather than C itself would be preferable to the community. Hence the gain 
from trade along line A 1B cannot be measured by an increase in the input of 
labour in the ratio BB2/OB. It tends only to overstate the gain from trade. 
Ronald Findlay attempted a modification over the Ricardian measure of gain 
from trade by introducing in this analysis the community indifference curve. 
Given the community indifference curve I, the equilibrium does not take 
place at the Ricardian trade equilibrium position C but at D where the 
production possibility curve A 3B3 became tangent to the community 
indifference curve I. 
At point D, everyone in the community is better off than at C. The gain from 
trade in this situation is BB3/OB rather than BB2/OB. The measure of gain 
from trade BB3/OB vindicates  the Malthusian criticism that the Ricardian 
measure of gain from trade was an over-estimation. 
3) J.S. Mill’s Approach: 
Ricardian approach did not explain the distribution of gains from trade among 
the trading countries. J.S. Mill in his approach attempted to analyse both the 
gains from trade and the distribution thereof among the trading countries. He 
stressed on the concept of reciprocal demand. 
According to him, reciprocal demand determines terms of trade, which  is a 
ratio of quantity imported to the quantity exported by a given country. The 
terms of trade determine the distribution of gains of trade between the trading 
partners. 
Suppose in country A, 1units of labour can produce 10  units of X and  10 
units of Y so that the domestic exchange ratio in country A is: 1 unit of X = 1 
unit of Y. In country B, 2 units of labour can produce 12  units of X and  18 
units of Y so the domestic exchange ratio in this country is: 1 unit of X = 1.5 
units of Y. The domestic exchange ratios set the limits within which  the 
actual exchange ratio or terms of trade will get determined. 
The reciprocal demand or the strength of the elasticity of demand of the two 
trading countries for the products of each other will decide the actual  rate of 
exchange of two commodities. If A's demand for commodity Y is less elastic, 
the terms of trade will be closer to its domestic exchange ratio: 1  unit of X = 
1 unit of Y. In this case,  the terms of trade will be favourable for country B 
and against country A. 
 
