--- Page 1 ---

BLOCK 9

INFERENTIAL STATISTICS

Unit 28
Unit 29
Unit 30
Unit 31

Sampling Theory
Sampling Distributions
Estimation

Hypothesis Testing

167

--- Page 2 ---

168

--- Page 3 ---

UNIT 28 SAMPLING THEORY

Structure

28.0 Objectives

28.1 Introduction

28.2 Advantages of Sample Survey

28.3 Sample Design

28.4 Biases in the Survey

28.5 Types of Sampling

28.6 Parameter and Statistic

28.7 Sampling Distribution of a Statistic
28.8 Standard Error

28.8.1 Utility of Standard Error

28.9 Expectation and Standard Error of Sample Mean

28.10 Expectation and Standard Error of Sample Proportion
28.11 Let Us Sum Up

28.12 Key Words

28.13 Answers/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises
28.14 Exercises

28.0 OBJECTIVES

After going through this unit, you should be able to

define sample survey;
identify the advantages of sample survey over the total enumeration;

describe how to design a sample survey and the associated probable biases
that can occur;

explain different types of sampling;
enlist the merits and demerits of different types of sampling methods;
distinguish between a parameter and a statistic; and

calculate the standard error and the standard deviation of a sample mean and
a sample proportion.

28.1 INTRODUCTION

Before giving the notion of sampling, we will first define population. In a

statistical investigation, interest generally lies in the assessment of the general
magnitude and the study of variation with respect to one or more characteristics
relating to individuals belonging to a group. The group of individuals under study
is called population or universe. Thus, in statistics, population is an aggregate of
objects, animate or inanimate, under study. The population may be finite or
infinite.

169

--- Page 4 ---

Inferential
Statistics

170

It is obvious that for any statistical investigation complete enumeration of the
population is rather impracticable. For example, if we want to have an idea of the
average per capita (monthly) income of the people in India, we will have to
enumerate all the earning individuals in the country, which is rather a very
difficult task both in terms of time and monetary costs.

A finite subset of statistical individuals in a population is called a sample and the
number of individuals in a sample is called the sample size. Every effort has to be
put to make a sample representative of a population, i.e., a sample should capture
all the heterogeneity embedded in a population. Thus, all salient features of
population are supposed to be present in the sample. For example, if a population
has 30% male and 70% female, then we also expect the sample to have nearly
30% male and 70% females.

A population is defined by some numerical characteristics called parameters
(like population mean or variance etc.). Generally, the values of the parameters of
interest remain unknown to the researcher; we calculate the “corresponding”
numerical characteristics of the sample, known as statistics (like sample mean or
sample variance) and use these to estimate, or make inferences about the true
value of the unknown parameter.

In the absence of time and budgetary constraints we conduct a census that is a
complete enumeration of the population (say size N). Examples include the
population census in India. The advantage is that there is no sampling error,
because all the units of a population are observed, and so there is no estimation or
prediction of population parameters (we can, in principle, determine the true
values exactly). However, non-sampling errors may occur.

In practice, surveys are usually conducted under circumstances which cannot be
fully controlled. Since the sample size (say n) cannot be very large, the design
and implementation of surveys requires considerable planning and teamwork.

Sample surveys are how new data are collected on a population. In a sample
survey, the true value of the population parameter is not known and is estimated
on the basis of sample statistics. Given that the sample is only a small subset of
population, the estimation exercise is subject to uncertainty and cannot be
expected to be 100 percent accurate. Thus, as we resort to estimating population
parameter values, sampling errors occur. The sampling error is inherent and
unavoidable in any sampling scheme. But because of the smaller numbers
involved (n < N), resources can be used to ensure high quality interviews, with
detailed questionnaire, ensure minimum missing information etc. So, non-
sampling errors are supposed to be less.

Thus, a Census is difficult to administer, time-consuming, expensive and does
not guarantee complete accuracy due to non-sampling errors. In contrast, a
sample survey is easier, faster and cheaper, although it introduces sampling errors
while non-sampling errors can be expected to be less.

--- Page 5 ---

Sampling is quite often used in our day-to-day practical life. For example, in a
shop, we assess the quality of sugar, wheat or any other commodity by taking a
handful of it from the bag and then decide to purchase or not. A housewife
normally tests the cooked products by a sample to find if they are properly
cooked and contain the proper quantity of salt.

28.2 ADVANTAGES OF SAMPLE SURVEY

Sample survey has some significant advantages over doing complete enumeration
or census study. The following are some of the advantages of sample
survey:

i) Reduction of Cost: Since size of the sample is far less than the entire
population, for a sample survey lesser number of staff and time are required
and that reduces the cost associated with it.

ii) Better Scope for Information: In the sample survey, the surveyor has the
scope of interacting more with the sample households and hence better
equipped to elicit better information on any particular issue than that of
census method. In the census method, due to time and financial constraints,
the surveyor cannot afford much time with any particular household to get

better information.

iii) Better Quality of Data: In the census method, due to time constraint, we do
not get good quality of data. But in sample survey, one can have a better
quality of data as the survey consists of all the information related to the
objectives of the study.

iv) Gives an Idea of the Error: For the population census, we do not have a
standard error, but for the sample survey we do have a standard error.
Given the information of the sample mean and standard error, we can
construct the limit within which the true value of population parameter will
lie.

Hence, to avoid the problems associated with complete enumeration, sample
survey is the best alternative for a statistical analysis.

28.3 SAMPLE DESIGN

In the absence of population data, we resort to draw a sample from the population
of interest, and use the sample observations (our data) to estimate a certain
parameter when its true value is unknown (due to the absence of population-level
data). The key aim of sampling is to select a representative sample from the

population in order to avoid sampling error.

Random Sampling - A simple random sample is a special case where each
population unit has an equal, known, non-zero probability of selection. In order

Sampling Theory

171

--- Page 6 ---

Inferential
Statistics

172

to collect a random sample, the researcher needs a sampling frame i.c., a list of
all population members. The key advantages of random sampling are:

It avoids systematic bias, and
It allows an assessment of the size of the sampling error.

Access to a sampling frame allows a known, non-zero probability of selection to
be attached to each population unit. This is the main feature of a random sample
and that is why the collection of random sampling techniques is also known as
probability sampling.

Randomization is the process by which a random sample is selected. It avoids the
biases caused by the prejudices of the person taking the sample. However, just by
chance, a random sample may have the appearance of extreme bias - for example,
drawing from a population of men and women produces a sample containing men
only. Such difficulties are usually resolved with some suitable form of restricted
randomization. One might for instance, in this example, use a stratified random
sample (by gender) and select half the sample from all men and the other half
from all women.

Random sampling is carried out, for large populations, by choosing a random
sample without replacement, when a subset of the very large population units, N
is selected.

If the sample is a sufficiently small proportion of the population (n is sufficiently
small), then we generally use random sampling with replacement.

Two things to be required to plan a survey — one is validity, i.e., we must review
the valid answers to the questions that we are looking at and the second is
optimising cost and efficiency. It is obvious that cost increases with the sample
size. Whereas efficiency, which is measured by inverse of variance of the
estimator [e.g., v(x, )=o'/n] increases with the sample size. If the sample size

increases, then values tend to stick around a central value, thus variance
decreases. Now from the cost point of view, a smaller number of sample is
desirable while from efficiency point of view large number of sample is
desirable. So given these two opposite facts, we design the sample in order to
collectively optimise the constraints.

Sample survey is done in three different stages. The first and the foremost is the
planning stage which includes —

Defining the Objectives: The most important thing is to determine clearly the
objectives of the survey, the subsequent research questions and the scope of the
survey. The research question will help us to identify the variables of our
concer. This is of immense help in deciding about the type of data to be
collected and the statistical techniques to be used for the processing and analysis
of the data. In the absence of the purpose of the enquiry being explicitly
specified, we are bound to collect some irrelevant information which is never

--- Page 7 ---

used subsequently and omit some important information which will ultimately
lead to fallacious conclusions and wastage of resources.

Defining the Population to be Sampled: The population from which units are to
be sampled should be defined clearly without any ambiguity. The sampling frame
or complete list of population members is critical for the design of random
sampling. For example, in field experimentation, the field should be clearly
defined in terms of the shape, size, etc., keeping in mind the border line cases so
that nothing is left at the discretion of the investigator. Due to certain practical
limitations and problems in dealing with certain units of the population, they are
usually eliminated from the scope of the survey.

Determination of the Data to be Collected: The decision about the type of the
data to be collected should be taken keeping in view the nature, objectives and
the scope of the survey, the time and finances at our disposal and the degree of
accuracy aimed at in the final results. Before starting the survey, the target group
must be defined, otherwise, the sample collected would not be the representative
one. Attempt should be made to eliminate the collection of irrelevant and
unnecessary data which are never used subsequently and to ensure that no
important or essential information is omitted. An outlying of the tables needed
for the results of the survey is quite helpful in this regard.

The Questionnaire or Schedule: After deciding about the nature of data to be
collected, the next step is the preparation of the questionnaire (to be filled by the
respondents) or schedule of enquiry (to be completed by the investigators after
interviewing people) for collecting the requisite information. The questionnaire
or the schedule should be designed and drafted with utmost care and caution,
keeping in view the knowledge, understanding and the general educational level
of respondents.

Determining of the Method of Collecting Data: There can be two methods of
collecting data; questionnaire method and interview method. Both these methods
have some demerits. In the questionnaire method, the responder may not respond
at all or may respond partially. In that case, those observations must be excluded
for better analytical results though there can be a risk of inadequate sample
observations. If the survey is having lot of non-response and such non-response
follow some pattern, then the data might get contaminated and suffer from
endogeneity problem. In such cases, merely dropping those observations may not
solve the problem.

Choice of the Sampling Units: Sampling unit must be chosen based on the
objectives so that surveying can be done easily.

Designing the Survey: It has two parts, (i) conducting a pilot survey, where
small scale survey is done before the original survey, to have a brief idea about
the survey; and (ii) deciding on the flexible variables, where target group should
be chosen to capture the exact information as far as possible.

Sampling Theory

173

--- Page 8 ---

Inferential
Statistics

174

From practical point of view, it is useful to conduct a pre-test or a pilot survey,
on a small scale before starting the main survey. Such small scale survey is useful
in various ways: (1) It helps in improving the organisation of the field work by
removing the defects or faults observed in the pilot survey (ii) It helps in
formulating effective methods of asking questions and also in the improvement
of the questionnaire (iii) The preliminary insights help in training of field staff
(iv) First-hand information exposes certain unknown issues or problems that may
otherwise be of a serious nature in a large scale main survey (v) It helps in
estimating the cost of the main sample survey and also the time needed for the
availability of the results.

Organisation of Field Work: To obtain reliable results in a sample survey, the
sampling errors should be minimized. For this it is essential that the field work is
properly organised and the personnel engaged in the conducting and execution of
the survey should be properly trained to handle the problems of the survey like
locating the sample units, use of the equipment and recording of the observations,
the methods of collecting the desired information, dealing with non-response, etc.
It is also desirable to provide for adequate and frequent supervisory check on the
field work.

Drawing the Sample: The easiest way to draw a sample is to identify each
sample unit with a given number; then putting the numbers in an urn, mix them
up and then draw out the required number of units as the sample size.

28.4 BIASES IN THE SURVEY

Bias often occurs in a survey when the sample does not accurately represent the
population. So, in the presence of bias there is a tendency of sample statistic to
systematically over- or under-estimate a population parameter. There is a long
list of statistical bias which may occur in a given sample survey. These are:

1) Selection Bias: The bias that results from an unrepresentative sample is
called selection bias. Some common examples of selection bias are described
below.

a) Under-Coverage — This occurs when some members of the population
are inadequately represented in the sample. Example: Exit poll/opinion
survey. Similarly, the survey which relies on aconvenience sample,
drawn from telephone directories and car registration lists, face the under-
coverage problem.

b) Nonresponse Bias- Sometimes, individuals chosen for the sample are
unwilling or unable to participate in the survey. This incompleteness of
information, known as non-response, is very likely to change the results
of the survey. Nonresponse bias arises when respondents differ in
meaningful ways from non-respondents. For example, a common
problem with mail survey or telephonic survey is that the response rate is
often low, making mail surveys vulnerable to nonresponse bias. In case of

--- Page 9 ---

d)

8)

large proportion of non-response, the results based on the information
supplied by a very small proportion of the selected individuals cannot be
regarded as reliable. Attempts should be made to minimize non-response
and the reasons for non-response should be recorded by the investigator.
An example would be ‘call-in radio’ shows that solicit audience
participation in surveys on controversial topics (like abortion, affirmative
action, transgender rights, gun control). The resulting sample tends to
over represent individuals who have strong opinions.

Substitution Bias- If difficulties arise in enumerating a_ particular
sampling unit included in the random sample, the investigators usually
substitute a convenient member of the population. This obviously leads to
some bias since the characteristics possessed by the substituted unit will
usually be different from those possessed by the unit originally included
in the sample.

Faulty Demarcation of Sampling Units- Bias due to defective
demarcation of sampling units is particularly significant in area surveys
such as agricultural experiments in the field or crop cutting surveys. In
such surveys, while dealing with border-line cases, it depends on the
discretion of the investigator whether to include them in the sample or
not.

Self-Selection Bias - If the subjects of the analyses are allowed to select
themselves, less proactive people may be excluded. The bigger issue is
that self-selection is a specific behaviour — that may correlate with other
specific behaviours. Hence, sample does not represent the entire
population.

Recall Bias - Recall bias is another common error of survey situations,
when the respondent does not remember things correctly. Humans have
selective memory by default. It is normal, but it makes research more
difficult.

Observer Bias -Observer bias happens when the researcher
subconsciously projects his/her expectations onto the research. It can
come in many forms, such as (unintentionally) influencing participants
(during interviews and surveys) or doing some serious cherry picking
(focusing on the statistics that support our hypothesis rather than those
that do not)

h) Survivorship Bias - Survivorship bias is a statistical bias in which the

researcher focuses only on that part of the data set that has already gone
through some kind of pre-selection process — and missing those data-
points, that fell off during this process (because they are not visible
anymore). Example: Reading case studies. Case studies are useful for
inspiration and ideas for new projects. But remind yourself all the time

Sampling Theory

175

--- Page 10 ---

Inferential
Statistics

176

2)

that only success stories are published! You will never hear about the
stories where someone used the exact same methods, but failed.

All the biases discussed above are related to procedural bias. It can be in
the form of response bias, where people do not tend to respond properly;
observational bias, where sample chosen are not representative of the
population. Very often either of the two occurs. There can be other types
of procedural biases, like, non-response bias, where people do not
respond at all; and interviewer bias, where the interviewer collects the
information with a biased frame of mind.

Omitted Variable Bias - In statistics, omitted-variable bias (OVB) occurs
when a statistical model leaves out one or more relevant variables. The bias
results in the model attributing the effect of the missing variables to the
estimated effects of the included variables. More specifically, OVB is the bias
that appears in the estimates of parameters in a regression analysis. When the
assumed specification is incorrect, it means that an independent variable that
is correlated with both the dependent variable and one or more of the
included independent variables is omitted.

A survey produces a sample statistic, which is used to estimate a population
parameter. If you repeated a survey many times, using different samples each
time, you might get a different sample statistic. And each of the different
sample statistics would be an estimate for the same population parameter. If
the statistic is unbiased, the average of all the statistics from all possible
samples will equal the true population parameter; even though any individual
statistic may differ from the population parameter. The variability among
statistics from different samples is called sampling error. Increasing the
sample size tends to reduce the sampling error; that is, it makes the sample
statistic less variable. However, increasing sample size does not affect survey
bias or procedural bias. A large sample size cannot correct for the
methodological problems (under coverage, nonresponse bias, etc.) that
produce survey bias.

Check Your Progress 1

3)

2)

List the advantages of sample survey.

