--- Page 57 ---
 
 
External Sector and 
Trade Policy 
56 
20.1 INTRODUCTION 
The term Foreign Capital is primarily associated with inflow of foreign 
capital into home country from foreign countries. Spread of globalisation and 
opening of the economies along with recent technological advances have led 
to movement of firms from one geography to another, thereby contributing to 
the economic integration of the world. For any economy, particularly for the 
developing economy, foreign capital plays acritical role including by (i) 
bridging investment-saving gap (ii) bridging management, entrepreneurship, 
technology and skilling gap (iii) bridging foreign exchange gap, (iv) 
undertaking initial business risks, (v) contributing to development of basic 
economic infrastructure, (vi) supporting stability of foreign exchange and 
reducing balance of payment deficit, (vii) facilitating integration with other 
economies of the world for trade of goods and services and (vii) eventually 
supporting higher development. Because of these collateral benefits 
associated with foreign capital, greater use of foreign capital is associated 
with improved prospects for economic growth. 
Foreign capital helps to improve the competitiveness of the domestic 
economy by breaking domestic monopolies. A healthy competitive 
environment always pushes firms to continuously enhance their processes 
and product offerings, thereby fostering innovation. Consumers also gain 
access to a wider range of competitively priced products. 
From the perspective of both governments and businesses, foreign capital has 
become an important factor in driving economic growth and development. By 
acquiring a controlling interest in foreign assets, businesses can quickly 
explore new products, technologies, and markets. Leveraging the foreign 
capital, governments can create jobs and improve economic growth. Various 
studies have shown that the growth of developing and emerging economies is 
being driven by leveraging incoming foreign capital in the form of direct 
investments. At the same time, firms investing abroad can realise higher 
growth rates and diversify their income, which creates opportunities for 
investors. 
In this unit we shall discuss these various issues related to the foreign capital. 
20.2  TYPES OF FOREIGN CAPITAL 
In the broader term, foreign capital can be classified in the following 
categories: 
1) Foreign Investment: 
i) Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) 
ii) Foreign Portfolio Investment (FPI) 
2) External Commercial Borrowings (ECB) 
3) Commercial Deposits by Non-Resident Citizens / NRI Deposits 
4) External Assistance 
i) Loans 


--- Page 58 ---
 
 
Foreign Capital 
57 
ii) Grants 
iii) Debt Service Payment 
iv) Foreign Aid 
According to Reserve Bank of India (RBI), foreign investment means any 
investment made by a person resident outside India on a repatriable basis in 
capital instruments of an Indian company or to the capital of a limited 
liability partnership (LLP). 
Similarly, Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is the investment through capital 
instruments by a person resident outside India (a) in an unlisted Indian 
company; or (b) in 10 per cent or more of the post issue paid-up equity 
capital on a fully diluted basis of a listed Indian company. In a broader sense, 
FDI pertains to international investment in which the investor obtains a 
lasting interest in an enterprise in another country. More precisely, it may 
take the form of buying or constructing a factory in a foreign country or 
adding improvements to such a facility, in the form of property, plants, or 
equipment. FDI is calculated to include all kinds of capital contributions, 
such as the purchases of stocks, as well as the reinvestment of earnings by a 
wholly owned company incorporated abroad (subsidiary), and the lending of 
funds to a foreign subsidiary or branch. The reinvestment of earnings and 
transfer of assets between a parent company and its subsidiary often 
constitutes a significant part of FDI calculations. 
RBI describes Foreign Portfolio Investment (FPI) as any investment made by 
a person resident outside India in capital instruments where such investment 
is (a) less than 10 per cent of the post issue paid-up equity capital on a fully 
diluted basis of a listed Indian company or (b) less than 10 per cent of the 
paid-up value of each series of capital instruments of a listed Indian 
company. Broadly speaking, FPI is a category of investment instruments that 
is more easily traded, may be less permanent, and do not represent a 
controlling stake in an enterprise. These include investments via equity 
instruments (stocks) or debt (bonds) of a foreign enterprise e.g. Foreign 
Institutional Investors, which does not necessarily represent a long-term 
interest. 
While FDI tends to be commonly undertaken by multinational corporations, 
FPI comes from many diverse sources such as a small company’s pension or 
through mutual funds held by individuals. The returns that an investor 
acquires on FPI usually take the form of interest payments or dividends. 
Investments in FPI that are made for less than one year are distinguished as 
short-term portfolio flows. 
Calculations of FDI and FPI are typically measured as either a “flow”, 
referring to the amount of investment made in one year, or as “stock”, 
measuring the total accumulated investment at the end of that year. 
As per framework introduced by RBI, External Commercial Borrowings 
(ECBs)
1 are commercial loans raised by eligible resident entities from 
                                                           
1Master Direction - External Commercial Borrowings, Trade Credits and Structured 
Obligations, FED Master Direction No.5/2018-19, Reserve Bank of India 


--- Page 59 ---
 
 
External Sector and 
Trade Policy 
58 
recognised non-resident entities and should conform to parameters such as 
minimum maturity, permitted and non-permitted end-uses, maximum all-in-
cost ceiling, etc. The parameters apply in totality and not on a stand alone 
basis. RBI further prescribes the framework for raising loans through ECB. 
The ECB Framework enables permitted resident entities to borrow from 
recognised non-resident entities in the following forms: 
i) Loans including bank loans; 
ii) Securitised instruments (e.g. floating rate notes and fixed rate bonds, 
non-convertible, optionally convertible or partially convertible 
preference shares / debentures); 
iii) Buyers’ credit;  
iv) Suppliers’ credit;  
v) Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds (FCCBs);  
vi) Financial Lease; and  
vii) Foreign Currency Exchangeable Bonds (FCEBs) 
However, ECB framework is not applicable in respect of the investment in 
Non-convertible Debentures (NCDs) in India made by Registered Foreign 
Portfolio Investors (RFPIs). 
Commercial loans, which primarily take the form of bank loans issued to 
foreign businesses or governments. External Assistance to India denotes 
multilateral and bilateral loans received under the agreements between 
Government of India and other Governments/International institutions and 
repayments of such loans by India, except loan repayment to erstwhile 
“Rupee area” countries that are covered under the Rupee Debt Service. This 
also include Official Development Assistance (ODA), received by the 
country from donor countries and International organisations e.g. UNO, 
World Bank etc.  The main objective of such aid is to promote the economic 
development of the recipient countries. 
20.3  FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN INDIA 
20.3.1  Trends and Magnitude of FDI 
At the time of opening of the Indian economy in 1991, foreign investment, 
was small, a total of just $103 million. With the opening up of the economy, 
it grew substantially and in 2006-07 reached $29.2 billion. In recent years, 
FDI trend in Indian Economy is moving in upward direction that too rapidly. 
FDI has emerged as the predominant source of external financing. The 
attractiveness of India as a preferred investment destination could be 
ascertained from the large increase in gross and net FDI inflows to India. 
Gross inflow of foreign investment in India grew from $4.03 billion in 2000-
01 to $74.39 billion in 2019-20. In terms of net inflow of FDI to India 
(inflow less outflow from India), this figure has grown from $3.27 billion in 
2000-01 to $43.01 billion in 2019-20. FDI inflows have continued to be 
buoyant in 2019-20. In both gross and net terms, FDI flows in 2019-20 were 


--- Page 60 ---
 
 
Foreign Capital 
59 
$74.4 billion and 43.0 billion respectively, well above their respective levels 
in 2018-19. The significant increase in FDI inflows to India reflected the 
impact of liberalisation of the economy since the early 1990s as well as 
gradual opening up of the capital account. As part of the capital account 
liberalisation, FDI was gradually allowed in almost all sectors, except a few 
on grounds of strategic considerations, subject to compliance of sector 
specific rules and regulations. 
During the global financial crisis, when there was a significant deceleration 
in global FDI flows the decline in FDI flows in 2009-10 to India was 
relatively moderate on the back of strong rebound in domestic growth. 
However, in subsequent year of 2010-11, gross FDI equity inflows to India 
witnessed significant moderation. After the launch of Make in India in 
September 2014, the trends in FDI have improved, showing a positive impact 
on the foreign investors due to investor friendly signals from India. India has 
jumped from 15
th position in 2014 to 10th position in 2015 in the most trusted 
nations for FDI. According to World Investment Report 2020, published by 
UNCTAD, despite a slowdown in the global economy and growing global 
investment concerns due to disruptions in supply chains, India was able to 
sustain the pace of FDI in 2019-20 and was the 9
th largest recipient country 
globally in 2019. Economic Survey 2019-20 pointed out that continuous 
liberalisation of FDI guidelines has been responsible for rising in flows of 
foreign investment into the country. 
Trends in Foreign Portfolio Investment (FPI) 
Foreign Portfolio Investment (FPI) is the entry of funds into a country where 
foreigners deposit money in a country's bank or make purchases in the 
country’s stock and bond markets, sometimes for speculation. Portfolio 
investments mainly include investment by foreign institutional investors 
(FIIs), funds raised through of American Depository Receipts (ADRs) or 
Global Depository Receipts (GDRs) by Indian companies and through 
offshore funds. An increase innet FPI flows improves the Balance of 
Payment (BoP) position and arises on account of cross-border transactions 
involving debt or equity securities, other than those included in direct 
investment or reserve assets. However, FPI is often referred to as “hot 
money” because of its tendency to flee at the first signs of trouble in an 
economy or improvement in investment attractiveness elsewhere in the 
world, particularly in the US, at the hands of the Federal Reserve. 
The Indian rules for foreign portfolio investments (FPIs) have undergone 
several regulatory changes designed to ease investment in the last few years. 
FPIs primarily consist of securities and other financial assets passively held 
by foreign investors, generally for short-term speculation. Foreign portfolio 
investment differs from foreign direct investment in that it does not give the 
invest or direct ownership of financial assets. 
FPIs in India have been volatile over the years. In 2008-09, 2015-16 and 
2018-19, there was a net portfolio outflow from the country that was seen as 
weakening of confidence of investors in India’s economy. 


--- Page 61 ---
 
 
External Sector and 
Trade Policy 
60 
The net portfolio out flow in 2008-09 was $14.03 billion. This is when the 
financial crisis hit the developed economies, and many financial institutions 
would have withdrawn investments from India and other developing 
countries, in order to strengthen their balance sheets at home. In 2015-16 
foreign portfolio flows, remain vulnerable to bouts of global risk aversion 
which resulted in outflow to the tune of $4.13 billion. Similarly, in 2018-19, 
there was a net portfolio outflow of $0.62 billion from the country that was 
seen as weakening of confidence of investors in India’s economy. 
Trends in External Assistance to India 
External assistance is composed of loans and grants. External assistance by 
India - denotes aid extended by India to other foreign Governments under 
various agreements and repayment of such loans. External Assistance to India 
denotes multilateral and bilateral loans received under the agreements 
between Government of India and other Governments/International 
institutions and repayments of such loans by India, except loan repayment to 
erstwhile Rupee area countries that are covered under the Rupee Debt 
Service. However, most of the assistance in the initial periods of planning 
were in the form of interest-bearing loans, while only a fraction was in the 
form of outright grants. According to a position paper published by 
Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Government of India 
in March 2008. 
“As per the extant policy, Government of India does not accept aid in areas 
where it has substantial control. While bilateral aid is accepted only from G-
8 countries, the Russian Federation, and the EC, tied aid is not accepted at 
all. Channelisation of external assistance from smaller partners (other than 
those mentioned above), is only through multilateral organisations to 
promote greater aid harmonisation. Further, all countries can provide 
bilateral development assistance directly to autonomous institutions, 
universities, NGOs, etc through a simplified procedure. Directing of external 
assistance of smaller size towards the non-government sector allows this 
sector to remain an effective channel for implementation of development 
programmes and strengthens the civil society”. 
Net Inflow of external assistance reached an all-time high of $4.72 billion in 
2010-11 and a record low of $-3.33 billion in 2003-04 (Table 20.3 in 
Appendix 20.2).  
Trends in NRI Deposits / Outstanding 
NRI deposits were first introduced in February 1970. The initial scheme was 
a rupee denominated account, the Non-resident (External) Rupee Account 
(NRE), with repatriable principal and interest. In November 1975, a foreign 
currency denominated deposit facility, the Foreign Currency Non-resident 
Account (FCNRA) was added. This deposit was also repatriable and was 
made attractive to the banks through the RBI assuming the exchange rate 
risk. Currently, there are three kinds of deposit accounts of Indian banks 
where NRIs or PIOs (persons of Indian origin) can park their funds - NRE 
(non-resident external-rupee account), NRO (non-resident ordinary rupee 
account) and FCNR(B) (foreign currency non-resident bank account). 


--- Page 62 ---
 
 
Foreign Capital 
61 
Deposits in NRE accounts are freely repatriable unlike NRO accounts. Both 
NRE and NRO accounts are rupee denominated. FCNR(B) are foreign 
currency accounts - dollar, euro, and pound sterling accounts. 
Notwithstanding positive accretions of deposits under Non-Resident 
(External) Rupee (NRE) accounts; and Non-Resident Ordinary (NRO) 
accounts, there was a net outflow of US$12.4 billion from non-resident 
deposits during 2016-17, following a lumpy redemption of FCNR(B) 
deposits raised by banks under the Reserve Bank’s special swap window 
during September to November 2013. 
Net flows into non-resident deposit account declined by 17 per cent in 2019-
20 as deposits under the Non-Resident (External) Rupee (NRE) accounts, 
which accounted for the bulk of the inflows declined sharply. Softening of 
term deposit rates and expectations of further depreciation of rupee amidst 
global uncertainties partly moderated flows into this account. Among the 
other two accounts, deposits in Non-Resident Ordinary Rupee (NRO) 
accounts and the Foreign Currency Non-Resident (Banks) [FCNR (B)] 
accounts remained at the previous year’s level 
20.3.2 Sectoral Distribution of FDI 
Sectoral Distribution of Equity FDI Inflows to India 
From a sectoral perspective, FDI 2 in India mainly flowed into services sector 
(with a cumulative total of $132.8 billion — 69.5 per cent of total equity FDI 
flow in the past five years from 2015-16 to 2019-20) followed by 
manufacturing, $43.5 billion (around 22.83 per cent during) the same period. 
Share of service in total equity FDI inflow to India increased from 62.6 
percent ($22.6 billion) in 2015-16 to 77.8 per cent (28.3 billion) in 2017-18 
and then declined to 74.2 per cent in 2019-20 ($31.6 billion). Within 
manufacturing sector, automobile, chemicals (other than fertilizers) and drugs 
& pharmaceuticals are the main sectors responsible for significant FDI. 
The Service sector in India includes Financial, Banking, Insurance, Non-
Financial/Business, Outsourcing, Research and Development (R&D), 
Courier, Tech, Testing and Analysis services. Within services, the top three 
sectors which witnessed highest cumulative inflows of FDI during past five 
years from 2015-16 to 2019-20 include communication services ($29.5 
billion), financial services ($22.0 billion) and retail and wholesale trade 
($20.5 billion). 
The rise in FDI flows to India has been accompanied by strong regional 
concentration. As per the data released by Department for Promotion of 
Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT)
3, the top six states, viz., Maharashtra 
(30.35 per cent), Karnataka (17.92 per cent), Delhi (16.6 per cent) Gujarat 
                                                           
2in equity through SIA/FIPB and RBI routes only and excluding acquisition of 
shares and equity capital of unincorporated bodies, as per Reserve Bank of India. 
 
3https://dipp.gov.in/sites/default/files/FDI_Factsheet_March20_28May_2020.pdf 


--- Page 63 ---
 
 
External Sector and 
Trade Policy 
62 
(11.05 per cent), Jharkhand (7.7 per cent)  and Tamil Nadu (4.21 per cent) 
accounted for over 80 per cent of the FDI equity flows to India between 
October 2019 to March 2020. The top two states, i.e., Maharashtra and 
Karnataka accounted for over 45 per cent of FDI flows during this period. 
Maharashtra alone accounted for over 30 per cent of FDI flows to India 
during the same period. 
Despite impressive growth rates achieved by most of the Indian states as well 
as aggressive investment promotion policies pursued by various state 
governments, the concentration of FDI flows across a few Indian states 
continues to exist. 
20.3.3  Countries of Origin of FDI in India 
Countries of Origin of FDI Equity Inflows to India 
Singapore and Mauritius remained the major source countries, accounting for 
about 50 per cent of cumulative equity FDI flows during past five years from 
2015-16 to 2019-20, followed by the Netherlands (8.4%), the US (7.6%), 
Japan (6.5%) and the Cayman Islands (3.1%). 
During 2019-20, India received the maximum FDI equity inflow from 
Singapore (US$ 12.6 billion), followed by Mauritius (US$ 7.5 billion), 
Netherlands (US$ 5.3 billion), Cayman Islands (US $3.5 billion), USA (US$ 
3.4 billion) and Japan (US$ 2.3 billion). 
20.3.4 Evolution of Inward Foreign Capital Policy 
The Indian growth story in the last three decades is a story of constant 
renewal and finding new purpose to meet the goals and aspirations of a 
billion people. The Indian economy has evolved and made significant 
progress from a closed economy until the 1990s to a vibrant economy of 
today. India’s policy on investment by foreign capital can also be divided into 
two phases, pre- and post-1991. There has been a sea change in India’s 
approach to foreign investment from the early 1990s when it began structural 
economic reforms encompassing almost all the sectors of the economy. 
Pre-Liberalisation Period (Pre-1991 Period) 
Historically, an extremely cautious and selective approach was followed by 
India while formulating Foreign Capital Policy. Import-substitution strategy 
was preferred in implementing industrialisation framework. Protecting and 
nurturing domestic industries was the primary goal. FDI through foreign 
collaboration was welcomed in the areas of high technology and high 
priorities to build national capability and discouraged in low technology 
areas. The regulatory framework was driven by the enactment of Foreign 
Exchange Regulation Act (FERA), 1973. Foreign equity holding in a joint 
venture was allowed only up to 40 per cent. Subsequently, various 
exemptions were extended to foreign companies engaged in export-oriented 
businesses and high technology and high priority areas including allowing 
equity holdings of over 40 per cent. As India continued to be highly 


--- Page 64 ---
 
 
Foreign Capital 
63 
protective, these measures did not add substantially to export 
competitiveness. Recognising these limitations, partial liberalisation in the 
trade and investment policy was introduced in the 1980s with the objective of 
enhancing export competitiveness, modernisation, and marketing of exports 
through Trans-national Corporations (TNCs). The announcements of 
Industrial Policy (1980 and 1982) and Technology Policy (1983) attempted 
for a liberal attitude towards foreign investments in terms of changes in 
policy directions. The policy was characterised by de-licensing of some of 
the industrial rules and promotion of Indian manufacturing exports as well as 
emphasising on modernisation of industries through liberalised imports of 
capital goods and technology. This was supported by trade liberalisation 
measures in the form of tariff reduction and shifting of large number of items 
from import licensing to Open General Licensing (OGL). 
Post-Liberalisation Period (Post 1991 Period) 
Major shift occurred when India embarked upon economic liberalisation and 
reforms programme in 1991 aiming to raise its growth potential and 
integrating with the world economy. Industrial policy reforms gradually 
removed restrictions on investment projects and business expansion on the 
one hand and allowed increased access to foreign technology and funding on 
the other. A series of measures that were directed towards liberalising foreign 
investment included: (i) introduction of dual route of approval of FDI– RBI’s 
automatic route and Government’s approval (SIA/FIPB) route, (ii) automatic 
permission for technology agreements in high priority industries and removal 
of restriction of FDI in low technology areas as well as liberalisation of 
technology imports, (iii) permission to Non-resident Indians (NRIs) and 
Overseas Corporate Bodies (OCBs) to invest up to 100 per cent in high 
priorities sectors, (iv) hike in the foreign equity participation limits to 51 per 
cent for existing companies and liberalisation of the use of foreign ‟brands 
name
’’ and (v) signing the Convention of Multilateral Investment Guarantee 
Agency (MIGA) for protection of foreign investments. These efforts were 
boosted by the enactment of Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 
1999 [that replaced the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act (FERA), 1973] 
which was less stringent. This along with the sequential financial sector 
reforms paved way for greater capital account liberalisation in India. Table 
20.1 summarises the evolutionary phases of India’s inward FDI policy 
regime. 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 65 ---
 
 
External Sector and 
Trade Policy 
64 
Table 20.1: Evolution of India’s Inward FDI Policy 
Policy Phase / 
Period 
Salient Features of Inward FDI Policy 
After 
Independence 
• India’s policy with regard to foreign capital was 
formulated, for the first time, in the Industrial Policy 
Resolution of April 1948. 
• The government recognised participation of foreign 
capital and enterprise, particularly as regards to 
industrial technique and knowledge for rapid 
industrialisation of the economy. 
• There were no restrictions on the 100 per cent 
ownership of Indian subsidiaries, but the authorities 
exerted informed pressure on foreign companies to 
sell part of their equity to local investors.  
• The policy environment was sufficiently 
unpredictable to discourage new entrants into India. 
During 1960-
1980s 
• FDI policy of India was more restrictive due to the 
need to develop local industries. 
• No FDI was allowed without transfer of technology. 
• Renewals of foreign collaborations were restricted. 
• Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 was 
restricted to FDI in certain core or high priority 
industries. 
• Equity participation was restricted to 40 per cent. 
• FDI regime was characterised by a cautious welcome 
to foreign investments meaning retaining majority 
domestic ownership and effective control in foreign 
enterprises. 
• Inward-looking, import substitution strategy of 
economic development began, quota, permit, and 
license regime prevailed all the way and was guided 
and controlled by the bureaucracy. 
• Development pattern was characterised by strong 
centralised pharming, government ownership of 
basic and key industries, excessive regulation and 
control of private enterprise, trade protectionism 
through tariff and non-tariff barriers. 
1980s to 1990s • Attitude towards FDI was liberalised as a part of the 
industrial policy resolutions. 
• Inward looking regulatory regime continued until the 
early 1980s. 
• Government of India introduced a series of measures 
through 1985-industrial policy, to reduce control on 
industries, particularly large ones. 
Since 1991 • Government started the process of liberalisation of 
FDI policy in July 1991; the first-generation reforms 
created conducive environment for foreign 
investment in India. Foreign investment and 


--- Page 66 ---
 
 
Foreign Capital 
65 
technology collaboration was welcomed to obtain 
higher technology, to increase exports and to expand 
the production base. 
• Foreign Exchange Regulation Act (FERA), 1973 
was replaced with Foreign Exchange Management 
Act, 1999 (FEMA). 
• Licensing and permit quota regime were eliminated, 
and firms in all but a few sectors were allowed to 
start operations without government approval. 
• Automatic route for FDI is permitted.  
• Except for certain specified activities, no prior 
approval from exchange control authorities i.e., 
Reserve Bank of India is required. 
• Many new sectors were thrown open for FDI.  
• Eventually, FDI was permitted in virtually every 
sector, except those of strategic concern such as 
defence and transport. 
• Approval mechanism for FDI was made simpler and 
transparent. 
• Two approval routes i.e., automatic route and 
Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) route 
was introduced. 
• Capital account restrictions were eased to allow 
Indian companies to raise capital abroad, by way of 
Eurobonds and GDR/ADRs. 
• Foreign companies were permitted to set up 100 per 
cent subsidiaries in India. 
• Focus shifted to opening of infrastructure, insurance 
and service sector, liberalising royalty payment 
regime and permitting royalty on trademarks and 
brand names. 
• Foreign equity was permitted up to 100 per cent in 
roads, ports, harbours, bridges, and highways in 
1999. 
• In the year 2000, a paradigm shift occurred, wherein, 
except for a negative list, all the remaining activities 
were placed under the automatic route. 
• From 2014 onwards, FDI regime was further 
liberalised in the sectors like defence, mining, 
insurance, pensions e-commerce, retail, and media 
etc.  
Source: Compiled from various reports published by RBI, Ministry of Finance 
20.3.5 Key Measures Taken by India to Attract FDI 
Advantage India: Key Facts 
i) India has the world’s most liberal FDI rules with sectors like insurance, 
defence, single brand retail, food processing, smart cities and space 
technology opening up for foreign investment. 
