--- Page 10 ---
 
 
9 
Trade Policy UNIT 18 TRADE POLICY 
Structure 
18.0 Objectives 
18.1 Introduction 
18.2 International Trade Policy 
18.3 Instruments of a Trade Policy 
18.4 International Trade Agreements: A Brief History 
18.5 Trade Policy of Developing Economies 
18.6 Trade Policy of India  
 18.6.1   Prior to 1991        
 18.6.2   Post 1991 
 18.6.3   FDI Policy in India 
 18.7 India and the Changing Nature of World Trade 
 18.7.1 Trade in Services 
 18.7.2 Trade in Intellectual Property 
 18.7.3 Trade in Agriculture 
18.8 Regional Agreements relevant for India 
 18.8.1 Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) 
18.9   Recent Scenario in Indian Trade 
18.10   Trade Policy of India 2015-2020 
18.11 Let Us Sum Up 
18.12 Term-end Exercises 
18.13 Key Words 
18.14 References 
18.15 Answers or Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
18.0 OBJECTIVES 
After going through this unit, you will be able to: 
● discuss the characteristics of International trade and in particular about 
the Indian trade prior and post 1991; 
● identify the instruments of a trade policy; 
● appreciate the trade policy of developing economies; 
● point out the emerging foreign trade issues in the changing nature of 
world trade; 
● explain the role of the FDI policy in India; and 
● evaluate the Foreign Trade Policy 2015-20. 
 
 


--- Page 11 ---
 
 
10 
External Sector and 
Trade Policy 18.1 INTRODUCTION 
In this unit we shall discuss the Indian trade policy, its features in pre-
economic reforms and post- economic reforms periods. We shall highlight 
the trade related important issues like trade in services, trade and intellectual 
property rights, and agriculture and regional trade agreements. The features 
of the trade policy 2015-2020 and its evaluation will also be discussed. To 
begin with, let us discuss the concept of international trade policy.    
18.2 INTERNATIONAL TRADE POLICY 
International trade policies from a country’s point of view are those policies 
which the government adopts towards international trade. These are the 
policies that involve a number of actions like taxes on international 
transactions of goods and services, subsidies for other transactions, legal 
limits on the value and volume of imports and exports and many other 
measures. Trade policy involves a number of instruments described in the 
section that follow. 
Additionally, there are various international organisations  ensuring smooth 
trade flows between the nations. For instance, the World Trade Organisation 
(WTO) is a major international organisation that deals with the rules of trade 
between nations. WTO operates a global system of trade rules, acts as a 
forum for negotiating trade agreements, settles trade disputes between its 
members and supports the trade related needs of developing countries. Thus, 
the goal is to ensure that trade flows are as smooth, predictable and free as 
possible. 
18.3  INSTRUMENTS OF A TRADE POLICY 
1) Tariffs 
Tariffs are among the oldest forms of trade policy instruments and have 
traditionally been used as a source of government income. Tariffs can be 
classified as: 
● Specific tariffs– taxes that are levied as a fixed charge for each unit of 
goods imported. 
● Ad-valorem tariffs– Taxes that are levied as a fraction of the value of the 
imported goods. 
A compound duty (tariff) is a combination of an ad -valorem and a specific 
tariff. 
In analysing trade policy in practice, it is important to know how much 
protection a trade policy actually provides. Protection can be categori sed as 
nominal rate or effective rate of protection. The nominal rate of protection 
(NRP) on any good is the proportional difference between its domestic and 
international (or world) price arising from the trade policies in question. 


--- Page 12 ---
 
 
11 
Trade Policy These policies can include import tariffs, export taxes, quantitative 
restrictions, etc. Thus, NRP is  
                       NRP = (Pd –  Pw)/ Pw × 100 
Where Pd and Pw are the domestic and world price, respectively. 
Since trade involves both inputs and outputs, it is important to measure 
effective rate of protection i.e. one must consider both the effects of tariffs on 
the final price of a good, and the effects of tariffs on the costs of inputs used 
in production. 
The effective rate of protection is a commonly used measure of net effect of 
trade policies on the incentives facing domestic producers. In case of a 
garment producer, for instance, taxes or other restrictions on clothing imports 
raise domestic clothing prices and are beneficial to domestic producers 
selling in the local market. On the other hand, a tariff-induced increase in the 
domestic price of fabric raises garment producers’ costs and so is harmful to 
them. The net impact of trade policies on the producers of any good depends 
on their effects on prices of both their outputs and their inputs. 
One can express the amount of effective protection as a percentage of the 
price that would prevail under free trade. The actual protection provided by a 
tariff will not equal the tariff rate if imported intermediate goods are used in 
the production of the protected good.  
Thus, Rate of Effective Protection = [VT  – VW] / VW where V is value 
added at world prices (W) and in presence of trade policies (T).  
For example: Suppose a 10 per cent tariff is applied to motorcycles, so that a 
totally India made motorcycle which originally sold for Rs. 25000 (under free 
trade) can now sell for Rs 27500 because of the protection from foreign 
imports. In this calculation, effective protection equals nominal, i.e., 10 per 
cent. However, suppose imported inputs used in motorcycles were Rs.15000. 
Then the effective rate of protection is 25 per cent {= [(27500   – 
15000)/10000)] – 1}. 
2) Export Subsidies 
It is a payment by the government to a firm or individual that ships a good 
abroad. When the government offers an export subsidy, shippers will export 
the good up to the point where the domestic price exceeds the foreign price 
by the amount of the subsidy. It can be either specific or ad valorem. An 
export subsidy raises prices in the exporting country while it lowers them in 
the importing country. 
3)  Import Quotas 
An import quota is a direct restriction on the quantity of a good that is 
imported. The restriction is usually enforced by issuing licenses to some 
group of individuals or firms i.e. the right to sell in India is given directly to 
the governments of exporting countries. License holders are able to buy 
imports and resell them at a higher price in the domestic market. The profits 
received by the holders of import licenses are known as quota rents. 


--- Page 13 ---
 
 
12 
External Sector and 
Trade Policy 
4) Voluntary Export Restraints 
A voluntary export restraint (VER) is an export quota administered by the 
exporting country. It is also known as a voluntary restraint agreement (VRA). 
VERs are imposed at the request of the importer and are agreed to by the 
exporter to forestall other trade restrictions. A VER is exactly like an import 
quota where the licenses are assigned to foreign governments and is therefore 
very costly to the importing country. A VER is always more costly to the 
importing country than a tariff that limits imports by the same amount. The 
tariff equivalent revenue becomes rents earned by foreigners under the VER.  
5) Local Content Requirements 
A local content requirement is a regulation that requires that some specified 
fraction of a final good be produced domestically. This fraction can be 
specified in physical units or in value terms. Local content laws have been 
widely used by developing countries trying to shift their manufacturing base 
from assembly back into intermediate goods. Local content laws do not 
produce either government revenue or quota rents. Instead, the difference 
between the prices of imports and domestic goods gets averaged in the final 
price and is passed on to consumers. Firms are allowed to satisfy their local 
content requirement by exporting instead of using parts domestically.  
Other restrictions are like Export Credit Subsidies (form of a subsidised loan 
to the buyer of exports, resulting in the same effect as regular export 
subsidies), National Procurement [purchases by the government (or public 
firms) can be directed towards domestic goods, even if they are more 
expensive than imports], Red Tape Barriers (barriers put by the governments 
based on health, safety and customs procedures). 
18.4 INTERNATIONAL TRADE AGREEMENTS: 
A BRIEF HISTORY 
Post-World War II, in order to take full advantage of bilateral and multilateral 
coordination, a group of 23 countries began trade negotiations under a 
provisional set of rules that became to be known as the General Agreement 
on Tariffs and Trade, or GATT. Officially, the GATT was an agreement, not 
an organisation-the countries participating in the agreement were officially 
designated as “contracting parties,” not members. In practice, the GATT did 
maintain a permanent “secretariat” in Geneva, which everyone referred to as 
“the GATT”. In 1995, the World Trade Organisation (WTO) was established- 
finally creating the formal organisation envisaged 50 years earlier. However, 
the GATT rules remain in force, and the basic logic of the system remains the 
same. Tariffs were the main point of contention among countries. Thus, 
various trade rounds (wherein, large groups of countries get together to 
negotiate a set of tariff reductions and other measures to liberalise trade) were 
conducted to reach a consensus on the tariff issues. The first five trade rounds 
under the GATT took the form of “parallel” bilateral negotiations, where 
each country negotiates pair-wise with a number of countries at once. The 
sixth multilateral trade agreement, known as the Kennedy Round, was 


--- Page 14 ---
 
 
13 
Trade Policy completed in 1967. This agreement involved an across-the-board 50 per cent 
reduction in tariffs by the major industrial countries, except for specified 
industries whose tariffs were left unchanged.  The so-called Tokyo Round of 
trade negotiations (completed in 1979) reduced tariffs employing a formula 
more complex than that used under the Kennedy Round. Finally, in 1994 an 
eighth round of negotiations, the so-called Uruguay Round was completed. 
The Uruguay Round, like previous GATT negotiations, cut tariff rates around 
the world. The average tariff imposed by advanced countries fell almost 40 
per cent as a result of the round. More important than this overall tariff 
reduction were the moves to liberalise trade in two important sectors, 
agriculture and clothing. 
The ninth major round of world trade negotiations, known as the Doha round, 
began in 2001. Its aim was to achieve major reform of the international 
trading system, with the fundamental objective to improve the trading 
prospects of developing countries through the introduction of lower trade 
barriers and revised trade rules. It ended without the negotiations being 
completed, resulting in a spurt in bilateral trade agreements. 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) What is the difference between nominal rate of protection and effective 
rate of protection? 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
2) What is the idea behind the formation of WTO? 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
18.5 TRADE POLICY OF DEVELOPING 
ECONOMIES 
Trade policy in developing countries is concerned with two objectives: 
promoting industrialisation and coping with the uneven development of the 
domestic economy. Government policy to promote industrialisation has often 
been justified by the infant industry argument, which says that new industries 
need a temporary period of protection against competition from established 
industries in other countries. Using the infant industry argument as 
justification, many less-developed countries have pursued policies of import-
substituting industrialisation in which domestic industries are created under 


--- Page 15 ---
 
 
14 
External Sector and 
Trade Policy 
the protection of tariffs or import quotas. Beginning from about 1985, many 
developing countries, dissatisfied with the results of import-substitution 
policies, greatly reduced rates of protection for manufacturing. As a result, 
developing-country trade grew rapidly, and the share of manufactured goods 
in exports rose. The results of this policy change in terms of economic 
development, however, have been, at best, mixed. This idea had been mainly 
confounded by the Asian Economies including India. 
18.6 TRADE POLICY OF INDIA 
18.6.1    Prior to 1991 
In the post-independence period, prior to 1991, India followed a protectionist 
approach. The principle objectives of this protectionist policy were to: 
a)  stabilise balance of payments,  
b)  encourage industrialisation,  
c)  fulfil the objectives of self-reliance and self-efficiency,  
d)  help in reallocation of resources,  
e)  increase employment, and  
f)  provide revenue for the government.  
The selection of instruments, adopted for achieving the objectives of the 
protectionist policy, can be classified in two broad groups: (a) tariff and (b) 
non-tariff measures. These instruments were basically used to bring about 
changes in price, volume or other parameters relating to tradable 
commodities and services. In the pre-reform period, India’s import and 
export policy was guided by the Import and Export Control Act of 1947. In 
1977, two additional orders, viz. the Import Control Order and Export 
Control Order, were introduced and the subsequent annual policy of imports 
and exports was based on these legislations. A long-term trade policy, for 
three years, was announced in 1985 by the government and some concrete 
steps towards liberalisation were taken within the framework of economic 
reforms.  
In the pre-reform period, India’s trade policy regime was complex and 
cumbersome. There were different categories of importers, different types of 
import licences, alternate ways of importing, etc. Different types of licenses, 
that used to be issued in the pre-reform period, can be categorised as: (a) 
Open General License, (b) Automatic License, (c) Supplementary Import 
License and (d) Imports through government-owned canalised agencies. The 
trade policy was geared towards developing a self-reliant production 
structure. There were high tariffs on imports. The intention of high tariffs was 
to promote domestic production, by making imported goods more expensive 
than those produced at home. This is what is called import substitution. Apart 
from import duties, there were various permissions required before importing 
something. Importing a computer, for instance, required many licenses and 
permissions. The central government would decide on imports, depending on 
its assessment of its importance for the national economy.  


--- Page 16 ---
 
 
15 
Trade Policy Import substitution had its other side - that of discouraging exports. There 
was no active policy of discouraging exports. But import tariffs meant that 
the profits from investing in import substituting production were higher from 
investing in production for export. Assuming that costs of production were 
not substantially higher in India, the profits would also be greater. In exports, 
on the other hand, Indian producers would have to compete with producers 
from other countries and there would be no excess profits for them. Thus, the 
policy of high import tariffs served to discourage investment in exports. In a 
way, high import tariffs distorted market price signals away from exports 
towards import substitution.  
Economic policies are not just manufactured out of thin air. They are 
inevitably based on some theory of how the economy functions. What was 
the theory behind such a control on imports? The theory goes back right to 
the beginnings of plan development in India and was part of the formulation 
of the Second Five Year Plan (1961-65). The theory goes by the name of 
‘export pessimism’.  
Export Pessimism  
In the post-colonial situation of the 1950s, it was held that the export earnings 
of underdeveloped countries were subject to severe constraints. World 
manufacturing was concentrated in the industrialised or developed countries, 
while the underdeveloped countries were largely agrarian in nature. The 
structure of world trade reflected this division of the world economy. Under-
developed countries exported raw materials and primary goods, such as 
coffee, tea, raw cotton, or minerals. Developed countries exported 
manufactured products. World trade was an exchange of the manufacturer of 
industrialised countries with the agricultural and primary goods of agrarian 
and primary commodities producing countries.  
Manufactured goods are produced by companies, often large companies. 
With monopolistic market positions, these companies could determine the 
prices of their outputs, i.e. they were price-makers. Agricultural commodities 
are produced by large numbers of small producers. These small producers do 
not have market power and cannot set prices for their products, i.e. they are 
price-takers. On the other hand, the buyers of agricultural commodities from 
the developed countries are few in number. This is called a monopsony 
position, where there are just one or a few buyers along with a large number 
of sellers for a product. The buyer or buyers can then be price-makers for that 
primary commodity. The price of, say, coffee could be kept low and thus the 
returns to the millions of primary commodity producers would also be low.  
We need to add a third dimension to the structure of world trade to complete 
this picture. That is the control of key mineral resources by the Multinational 
Corporations (or MNCs), sometimes also called Trans-national Corporations 
(TNCs) of the industrialised economies. The MNCs had operations in more 
than one country, and they controlled much of the mineral and raw material 
resources of the developing countries. The classic example of this control 
was that of crude oil, mainly produced in West Asia, but controlled by the 
Anglo-American oil majors. The result of this control of crude oil was that 


--- Page 17 ---
 
 
16 
External Sector and 
Trade Policy 
the oil majors could keep the price of crude oil low and give a small royalty 
to the governments of the supplying countries.  
The role of under-developed countries in world trade was then to export 
agricultural commodities or minerals, non-manufactured goods of various 
kinds. In a competitive market, with a relatively fixed demand for agricultural 
commodities, an increase in production is likely to result in a fall in the price. 
Thus, even with an increase in production of the agricultural commodity, 
there may not be an increase in export earnings since prices may fall.  
Suppose there was a productivity increase by the farmers of coffee adopting 
more productive methods. Would the benefits of increased productivity not 
accrue to the producers? This would happen only if a few producers 
(progressive farmers) alone adopted the improved technology while the bulk 
of the farmers did not. Then, the progressive farmers would get the benefit of 
higher productivity. Their costs of production would go down. With a 
constant price, the higher productivity of the progressive farmers would give 
them higher export earnings. But productivity improvements by farmers can 
easily spread beyond a group or even country. If all the producers of coffee 
adopt the improved practice, then the monopsony buyer could use 
competition among sellers to bring the price down. The premium for 
increased productivity would then go to the buyers from the developed 
countries, who may or may not pass on the benefits to consumers in their 
own countries. On the other hand, the MNC producers of industrialised 
countries did not have to pass on the benefits of increased productivity. Their 
monopoly positions allowed them to set prices of manufactures.  
The implication of the above two propositions is that the terms of trade (i.e. 
ratio of prices of what a country sells to the prices of what it buys, or of 
primary goods’ prices to manufactured goods’ prices) for under-developed 
countries’ would deteriorate. This, in brief, was the powerful analysis on 
what is known as the Prebish-Singer hypothesis. This was the understanding 
of export pessimism - that there was a strict limit to what an under-developed 
country could earn in the export market.  
The other side of export pessimism was import rationing. Since India needed 
to develop its own industries, it needed scarce foreign exchange to be used 
mainly for importing equipment and machinery for industries. In times of 
food scarcity, food may also need to be imported. In this situation the limited 
foreign exchange earnings needed to be rationed, with the government and 
not players on the market deciding on what to import and what not to import 
on the basis of relative prices. Among all commodities that it was 
economically profitable to import, the government would decide on the most 
important uses of the limited foreign exchange.  
Export pessimism and import controls thus characterised Indian trade policy 
in the early decades after Independence. It began to change in the mid-1980s 
and was abandoned with the 1991 liberalisation. 
 


--- Page 18 ---
 
 
17 
Trade Policy 18.6.2    Post 1991 
The 1991 trade policy reforms were precipitated by the external debt crisis 
the government faced. At that time, the Indian government did not have 
sufficient foreign exchange to cover the external debt payments that were 
due. In order to avoid defaulting on its international debt obligations, the 
government was forced to approach the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
for a loan.  
Trade policy reform, focusing on tariffs and quantitative restrictions, was an 
important part of the economic reform initiated in 1991. Supplemented by 
recommendations of an Expert Committee, India’s trade policy reform paved 
the road for a major reduction of average tariffs, tariff peaks, simplification 
of the tariff and quota regimes, and removal of several import restrictions. 
These changes reflected a larger vision of reform to enhance the efficiency of 
domestic industry, together with a number of other objectives such as 
promoting infant industry, exports, technological upgradation and food 
security. 
The 1991 Union Budget recognised the significance of trade policy reform as 
part of the overall reform programme, stating for instance that: “The policies 
for industrial development are intimately related to policies for trade” (Para 
11 of Union Budget speech). Several steps were taken to reform trade policy: 
a more outward oriented regime was put in place, tariffs were reduced in a 
phased manner, import duties were streamlined or simplified, and a process 
transforming quantitative border restrictions to price-based measures was 
begun. 
Likewise, export incentives were continued, or new ones provided for a 
number of products, and institutional changes were made to bring 
transparency and to facilitate transactions involving domestic and foreign 
markets. This included the establishment of certain institutions or revised 
mandates for existing institutions that would help implement the new focus 
areas (e.g., the Tariff Commission).  
Further, 1991 trade policy reform was an exercise that balanced several 
objectives. For instance, loss of revenue was a major concern, and this was 
mentioned as a reason for not reducing the import duty more than what was 
being announced. In a number of instances, import tariffs were kept high to 
encourage infant industry. The need for protecting Indian industry against 
foreign competition, and to save foreign exchange, was explicitly recognised. 
This was balanced with a reduction in tariffs to lower input costs and to 
encourage export activities. Another important feature of the 1991 reform 
was that it began opening up the regime for FDI. While FDI was not linked at 
that time with trade policy, it created a base for increasing economic linkages 
with global markets. 
Average tariff levels prior to 1991 were in triple digits. The 1991 tariff 
reform reduced these very significantly, but the new levels too were very 
high at the end of the 1990s. A noteworthy feature of India’s tariff peaks and 
averages in the early 1990s was that though they were reduced from high 


--- Page 19 ---
 
 
18 
External Sector and 
Trade Policy 
levels, they were high (particularly for non-agriculture) compared with most 
tariffs prevailing in economies with low tariffs, e.g. the United States. Before 
1991, India imposed high auxiliary duties on imports. These were merged 
with basic tariffs and the overall combined tariff level. 
18.6.3 FDI Policy in India 
At the time of independence, policy towards FDI was largely conditioned by 
two factors: the Industrial Policy Resolution of 1948 and 1956, and the 
foreign exchange crisis, especially in the late fifties. However, in 1969 a 
more precise policy towards FDI was evolved. This consisted of setting out 
three groups of industries where (i) there would be FDI without technical 
collaboration (ii) only technical collaboration and (iii) no foreign 
participation. Second, the foreign exchange crisis precipitated the Foreign 
Exchange Regulation Act (FERA) particularly Article 29 which specified that 
any foreign owned firm with more than 40 per cent of equity held abroad had 
to apply to the Reserve Bank of India for approval in cases relating to 
expansion, mergers, purchase of shares in other firms, etc. FERA came into 
force in 1974 and all applications had been dealt with by 1979. 
A more liberal attitude towards foreign investment emerged after about 1980 
or so. This phase begins with the Industrial Policy statements of 1980 and 
1982 and, more importantly the Technology Policy Statement of 1983. For 
one, the policy statements began the process of delicensing. The New 
Industrial Policy of 1991 was the starting point of a new phase in FDI in 
India. Thus, with the new FDI policy up to 51 per cent foreign equity was 
permitted with automatic approval in specified industries producing 
intermediate and capital goods. Economic reforms post 1991 had encouraged 
foreign investment as well as foreign collaborations. The dominant policy at 
that time was export oriented FDI and restrictions on large volume of FDI in 
the form of equity. 
In 1995, India had reoriented its FDI policy. This is because India signed the 
Uruguay Agreement in 1995 which made it a member of the World Trade 
Organisation (WTO) and hence an automatic signatory to the agreement on 
trade related investment measures (TRIMS).  A series of measures that were 
directed towards liberalising foreign investment included: (i) introduction of 
dual route of approval of FDI – RBI’s automatic route and Government’s 
approval [Secretariat of Industrial Assistance (SIA)/ Foreign Investment 
Promotion Board (FIPB)] route, (ii) automatic permission for technology 
agreements in high priority industries and removal of restriction of FDI in 
low technology areas as well as liberalisation of technology imports, (iii) 
permission to Non-resident Indians (NRIs) and Overseas Corporate Bodies 
(OCBs) to invest up to 100 per cent in high priorities sectors, (iv) hike in the 
foreign equity participation limits to 51 per cent for existing companies and 
liberalisation of the use of foreign ‘brands name’ and (v) signing the 
Convention of Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) for 
protection of foreign investments. In order to give a fillip to combat decline 
in FDI post Asian Crisis in 1997, several measures were taken by the 
government to further liberalise FDI policies. Measures included were 
