--- Page 20 ---
 
 
19 
Trade Policy increasing the ceiling for FDI under the automatic route in oil refining from 
49 per cent to 100 per cent. Further, in order to standardise India’s FDI 
definition, a Committee was constituted by the Department of Industrial 
Policy and Promotion (DIPP) in May 2002 to bring the reporting system of 
FDI in India with international best practices. According to Economic survey 
2003-04, the revised definition included three categories of capital flows 
under FDI: equity capital, reinvested earnings and other direct capital. 
Previously, the data on FDI reported in the balance of payments statistics 
used to include only equity capital.  
This change in definition was called for in order to bring the reporting system 
of FDI data in India into alignment with best international practices. Thus, 
with increasing liberalisation India has become an important destination for 
FDI. At present 100 per cent FDI is provided in most of the sectors except in 
defence sector which is open to FDI subject to 26 per cent cap. Sectors where 
FDI is completely banned are Retail Trading (except single brand wholesale 
retailing), atomic energy, lottery, business including Government / private 
lottery, online lotteries, gambling and betting including casinos, business of 
Chit fund and Nidhi company, real estate business, or construction of farm 
houses, manufacturing of cigars, cheroots, cigarillos and cigarettes, of 
tobacco or of tobacco or of tobacco substitutes and trading in transferable 
development rights. Thus, with increased FDI there is an increased 
prevalence of multinational corporations as it is the companies that trade.  
Check Your Progress 2 
1) What do you mean by export pessimism? State the implications of export 
pessimism and import control prior to 1991 period. 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
2) Identify the measures taken by the government to liberalise FDI policy 
post 1995. 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
3) State the categories of FDI as identified in Economic Survey 2003-04. 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 


--- Page 21 ---
 
 
20 
External Sector and 
Trade Policy 18.7 INDIA AND THE CHANGING NATURE OF 
WORLD TRADE 
There has been a change in the nature of trade. During the Eighth WTO 
Ministerial Conference held in Geneva in 2011, some Ministers said that the 
WTO needed to pay more attention to global value chains (GVCs).  A global 
value chain (GVC) is a chain of separate but inter-linked and coordinated 
activities, which can be undertaken within a single firm or be divided among 
multiple firms in different geographical locations to bring out a product or a 
service from conception to complete production and delivery to final 
consumers.  
India participates strongly in manufacturing GVCs for chemicals, electrical 
instruments and other manufactures (for  example, jewellery). India’s 
participation in manufacturing GVCs is due to sourcing of intermediates from 
abroad. India also shows a high participation rate in services as well, 
especially business activities.  
18.7.1 Trade in Services 
Trade traditionally meant trade in goods. However, with several services 
becoming tradable and due to increased globalisation and integration of the 
economies, trade in services have become a common parlance among 
countries. The WTO under the General Agreement on Trade in Services 
(GATS) recognises three modes of trade in services. Mode 1 is by foreign 
companies investing in the country where the services are to be provided. 
Mode 2 is by off-shoring of the service to a foreign location. A good example 
of this are the call centres that have come up in many cities of India providing 
services such as answering consumer inquiries, taking orders, etc. Mode 3 is 
the movement of what in legal terminology is called ‘natural persons’, 
another term for migration.  
Indian firms have established a strong presence in the world trade in services. 
Indian firms carry out a multitude of off-shoring tasks– from simple 
consumer service centres, to accounting services and the various business 
tasks called Business Process Outsourcing (BPO). These are also called IT 
Enabled Services (ITES), since they depend crucially on IT and 
communication technology. 
18.7.2 Trade in Intellectual Property 
In the WTO regime, trade issues have been somewhat broadened to include 
matters of Intellectual Property (IP) Rights (TRIPS or Trade Related 
Intellectual Property Rights). Under TRIPS, all member countries are 
required to have a similar IP protection law. Patent rights must be allowed for 
products and not only processes. Before the WTO requirement, Indian IT law 
protected only processes and not products. As a result, Indian pharmaceutical 
companies could develop different processes to ‘reverse engineer’ products 
initially made in the industrialised countries. 
 


--- Page 22 ---
 
 
21 
Trade Policy 18.7.3 Trade in Agriculture 
Another area of contention in trade policy is that towards agriculture. 
Agreements in this area have been stalled by the collapse of the Doha Round 
of WTO negotiations. The USA and European Union (EU) both provide large 
subsidies to their farmers. These are categorised in WTO terms under 
different colours– Red as trade distorting, such as an export duty or export 
subsidies, or Green for general support to the sector. But such general support 
also helps the subsidy-receiving farmers to export at lower prices. This brings 
down the price of agricultural commodities and could enable the developed 
countries to increase their agricultural exports. The developed countries have 
been pressing for an agreement to reduce or, even eliminate controls on 
agricultural imports.  
India has insisted on maintaining controls on agricultural imports, even 
exports for that matter. The argument is basically that agriculture is not the 
production of a commodity but is also the means of livelihood of crores of 
small and medium farmers in the country. Particularly where new jobs in 
low-skill manufacturing are not growing so fast, India wants to protect its 
agriculture from cheap exports promoted by subsidies from the developed 
economies.   
18.8 REGIONAL AGREEMENTS RELEVANT 
FOR INDIA 
India has bilateral trade arrangements with all major regional groupings. In 
Europe, it is a part of European Free Trade Association (EFTA), consisting of 
Switzerland, Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein. In 2018-19, India exports to 
and imports from EFTA stood at US$ 1,534.00 million and US$ 18,076.88 
million, respectively. Among SAARC countries, India and Bangladesh have 
a bilateral trade agreement and both countries are exploring the possibility of 
entering into a bilateral Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement 
(CEPA). Negotiations for India and Iran entering into a Preferential Trading 
Agreement (PTA) are under way. Review meetings for India-Nepal Treaty of 
Trade are going on. With Sri Lanka, India has India-Sri Lanka Free Trade 
Agreement (ISLFTA), under which duty-free access for almost all the 
products except a few is provided. India is also negotiating a new Economic 
and Technology Cooperation Agreement (ETCA) with Sri Lanka. India and 
ASEAN have agreed to start examining the preliminary proposals related to 
the scope of the review of ASEAN India Trade in Goods Agreement 
(AITIGA). Within ASEAN, India has a Comprehensive Economic 
Cooperation Agreement (CECA) with Singapore, Thailand and Malaysia. 
Among Latin American countries, India has Preferential Trade Agreements 
(PTA) with MERCOSUR (Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay) and 
Chile. India has signed 28 bilateral / multilateral trade agreements with 
various country/group of countries. However, few agreements as discussed 
below seem relevant for India. 
 


--- Page 23 ---
 
 
22 
External Sector and 
Trade Policy 
18.8.1 Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership 
(RCEP) 
Launched in Cambodia on December 20, 2012, the RCEP is an FTA between 
ASEAN and its FTA partners (Australia, Brunei, China, Cambodia, India, 
Indonesia, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, New 
Zealand, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam). The sixteen 
participating countries account for almost half the world’s population, 30 per 
cent of global GDP, and 25 per cent of world exports. RCEP seeks to achieve 
a modern, comprehensive, high-quality, and mutually beneficial economic 
partnership agreement that will cover trade in goods, services, investment, 
economic and technical cooperation, intellectual property, competition, and 
dispute settlement. India is participating in the RCEP negotiations but 
appears to be doing so with extreme caution.  
18.9 RECENT SCENARIO IN INDIAN TRADE 
In 2018-19, petroleum products were the largest exported commodity, in 
value terms, with a share of 14.1 per cent in the country’s export basket. 
Other major exports included pearls, precious, semi-precious stones as also 
gold and other precious metal jewellery besides drug formulations, 
biological. However, exports of organic chemicals grew at the highest rate at 
30.6 per cent in 2018-19. In the import basket of 2018-19, petroleum crude, 
at 22.2 per cent had the largest share followed by gold and other precious 
metals (Jewellery at 6.4 per cent and pearls precious/semi-precious stones at 
5.3 per cent).  
India’s major trading partners are the United States of America (USA), which 
accounted for 16 per cent of India’s exports (in value terms) in 2018-19, 
followed by the United Arab Emirates (UAE), China and Hong Kong. 
However, in 2018-19, growth of India’s exports to the Netherlands was the 
highest (40.7 per cent), followed by China (25.6 per cent) and Nepal (17.4 
per cent). China continues to be the largest source of imports of India 
accounting for 13.7 per cent of the total imported value in 2018-19. The other 
important sources from which India imports are the USA, UAE and Saudi 
Arabia.  
In 2018-19, India’s exports to countries with which it has a trade agreement 
stood at US$ 121.7 billion accounting for 36.9 per cent of India’s export to 
all the countries. Similarly, in the same year, India’s imports from countries 
with which it has a trade agreement stood at US$ 266.9 billion accounting for 
52.0 per cent of India’s imports from all the countries. 
18.10 TRADE POLICY OF INDIA 2015-2020 
The Government of India announced a Foreign Trade Policy for the period 
2015-2020 on 1
st April, 2015. The important measures taken by the 
Government in the Foreign Trade Policy 2015-2020 to include ‘Make in 
India’ and ‘Digital India’ programmes and to ease the trade are: 


--- Page 24 ---
 
 
23 
Trade Policy i)    Specific Export Obligation under Export Promotion Capital Goods 
(EPCG) scheme, in case capital goods are procured from indigenous 
manufacturers, has been reduced to 75 per cent of the normal export 
obligation, in   order to promote domestic capital goods manufacturing 
industry. 
ii)    Under   Merchandise Exports from India Scheme (MEIS), export items 
with high domestic content and value addition have generally been 
provided higher  level of rewards. 
iii)   For reward schemes and duty exemption schemes, hard copies of 
applications and specified documents which were required to be 
submitted earlier have now been dispensed with. 
iv)   Landing documents of export consignment as proof for notified market 
can now be digitally uploaded. 
v)    There will be no need to submit copies of permanent records / documents 
repeatedly with each application, once the same are uploaded in 
Exporter/Importer Profile. 
vi) For faster and paperless communication with various Committees of 
Directorate General of Foreign Trade (DGFT), dedicated e-mail 
addresses have been provided for various Committees, e.g. Norms 
Committees, Exim Facilitation Committee, etc.  
The Foreign Trade Policy 2015-2020 introduced two new schemes, namely, 
‘Merchandise Exports from India Scheme’ (MEIS) for incentivising export of 
specified goods to specified markets and ‘Services Exports from India 
Scheme’ (SEIS) for increasing exports of notified services from India. The 
scrips can be used for payment of customs duty, excise duty and service tax. 
All duty credit scrips issued under both the schemes and the goods imported 
against these scrips are fully transferable. Further, e-Commerce exports of 
certain specified employment creating sectors, made through courier or 
foreign post offices, have been supported under MEIS. 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) State the features of changing nature of world trade.  
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
2) Discuss the relevance of trade with respect to intellectual property and 
agriculture issues. 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 


--- Page 25 ---
 
 
24 
External Sector and 
Trade Policy 
3) Identify the major features of Exim policy 2015-20 aiming to the export 
of goods and services. 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
18.11 LET US SUM UP 
Trade policy refers to all the policies related to both exports and imports. 
Countries use different instruments of trade policy while framing their own 
trade policy. For example, most developing countries believed in import 
pessimism. In the case of India, prior to 1991, Indian trade policy was 
characterised by export pessimism and import controls. This situation began 
to change in the 1980’s and the control regime was abandoned after 1991 
economic reforms. In the changed situation of world trade, firms in the 
developing economies have managed to get entry into developed economy 
markets. India also accounts for a larger share of FDI inflows and its FDI 
policy is being liberalised regularly. India accounts for a substantial share of 
world trade in the services sector. Agricultural products due to subsidy to its 
farmers by developed countries are another area of controversy in trade 
policy.  India has bilateral trade arrangements with all major regional 
groupings and the most controversial one is the RCEP. The long-term export-
import policy 2015-20 aimed at doubling India’s share in global trade by 
2020 and accelerating the country’s contribution to the global vibrant 
economy to derive maximum benefits from expanding global market 
opportunities.  The country is on track to achieve the $1-trillion export 
target by 2025 with the government and industry deliberating on measures to 
boost exports, manufacturing and the new foreign trade policy. 
18.12 TERM-END EXERCISES 
1) India’s trade policy prior to 1991 was derived from the policy of self-
reliance. In the light of this statement critically evaluate India’s trade 
policy.  
2) Explain the important issues which are crucial and hence need to be 
addressed in India’s trade policy. 
3) Critically evaluate trade policy of India 2015-20. 
4) Discuss India’s position in changing the nature of world trade.  
5) Highlight the features of FDI policy in India since 1985. 
 
 


--- Page 26 ---
 
 
25 
Trade Policy 18.13 KEY WORDS 
General Agreement 
on Trade in 
Services (GATS) 
:
 This is the agreement on trade in services, which 
forms part of the WTO agreements. The preceding 
GATT did not have any agreement dealing with 
services. At that time, until the 1990s, there was not 
much trade in services. 
Multi-National 
Corporation 
(MNC) 
:
 An MNC, sometimes also called a TNC or Trans-
national Corporation, refers to a corporation that 
has subsidiaries or branches in more than one 
country. The branches may often be 100 per cent 
owned by the parent corporation, but they may also 
be with minority investment. 
Regional Trade :
 Refers to trade within a region, such as Europe, or 
Asia or parts of Asia. Regional trade has often led 
to Regional Free Trade Agreements (RFTAs).   
WTO - World 
Trade Organisation 
:
 Set up as the successor to the General Agreement 
on Trade and Tariffs (GATT). Its headquarters is in 
Geneva, Switzerland. The WTO is a membership-
based organisation. A member, on being accepted, 
agrees to all the instruments of the organisation. 
Unlike GATT, the WTO has a dispute resolution 
mechanism. Any member is free to take up a case 
against any other member. This allows for formal 
equality, but it is often difficult, because of the cost 
of engaging lawyers in Geneva. But India, for 
instance, has filed and won cases against the US. 
Voting in the WTO, as in the UN General 
Assembly, is ‘one country, one vote’. But decisions 
are usually arrived at through informal consultation 
mechanisms. 
18.14 REFERENCES 
1) International Economics: Theory and Policy (10th Edition) (Pearson 
Series in Economics) 10th Edition by Paul R. Krugman  (Author), 
Maurice Obstfeld (Author), Marc Melitz (Author)  
2) India: Trade Policy Review by V. N. Balasubramanyam. 
3) Annual Report of the RBI. 
4) Ministry of Finance, Economic Survey. 
5) FDI in India: History Policy and the Asian Perspectives by Manoj Pant 
and Deepika Srivastava. 
 
 


--- Page 27 ---
 
 
26 
External Sector and 
Trade Policy 18.15 ANSWERS OR HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES  
Check Your Progress 1 
1) See Section 18.3 
2) See Section 18.4 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) See Sub-section 18.6.1 
2) See Sub-section 18.6.3 
3) Equity Capital, reinvested earnings, direct capital  
Check Your Progress 3 
1) See Section 18.7 
2) See Sub-sections 18.7.2 and 18.7.3 
3) See Section 18.10 
 


--- Page 28 ---
 
 
27 
Foreign Trade and 
Balance of PaymentUNIT 19 FOREIGN TRADE AND BALANCE 
OF PAYMENT 
Structure 
19.0 Objectives 
19.1 Introduction 
19.2 Trade and Economic Development 
 19.2.1  Trade Policy Analysis Tools 
 19.2.2  Composition of Trade 
 19.2.3  Direction of Trade 
19.3 India’s Foreign Trade 
 19.3.1  Volume of India’s Merchandise Trade 
 19.3.2  Volume of India’s Trade in Services 
 19.3.3 Composition of India’s Merchandise Trade 
  19.3.3.1  Composition of India’s Merchandise Exports 
  19.3.3.2 Composition of India’s Merchandise Imports 
 19.3.4 Composition of India’s Trade in Services 
 19.3.5  Direction of India’s Foreign Trade 
19.4 India’s Balance of Payments  
 19.4.1  The Current Account 
 19.4.2  The Capital Account 
 19.4.3  The Financial Account 
 19.4.4  Net Errors and Omissions 
19.5 India’s Balance of Payments – Recent Trends  
 19.5.1  The Salient Features of India’s BOP 
19.6  External Debt 
19.7 Let Us Sum Up 
19.8 Key Words 
19.9 References 
19.10 Answers or Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
19.0  OBJECTIVES 
After going through this unit, you will be able to : 
● discuss the role of foreign trade in economic development of a country; 
● evaluate India’s foreign trade and the changes in its direction and 
composition; 
● assess India’s position of balance of payment; 
● outline the policy framework for restoring equilibrium in balance of 
payments. 
 
