--- Page 97 ---
96
Monetary and Fiscal Policies Tax Effort : Judged from ratio of tax revenue to State
income.
Vertical Imbalance, i.e., : The non-correspondence between the
Vertical Federal Fiscal expenditure requirements of the functions and
Imbalance the extent of revenue raised from the sources
assigned to the unit governments as compared
to the national government in a federation.
12.9 REFERENCES
1) Breton, Albert (1987). “Towards the theory of competitive federalism”,
European Journal of Political Economy, Special issue, V ol. 3, No. 1+2, pp.
263-328.
2) Cullis, John and Philip Jones (1992). Public Finance and Public Choice:
Analytical Perspectives, London: McGraw-Hill.
3) Fourteenth Finance Commission (2014)., Report, Volume-I, New Delhi:
Government of India.
4) Fifteenth Finance Commission (2019). First Report, New Delhi: Government
of India.
5) Lessmann, Christian (2012). “Regional Inequality and Decentralization: An
Empirical Analysis”, Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space ,
V ol.44, issue 6.
6) Rao, M. Govinda and Tapas K. Sen (1996). Fiscal Federalism in India:
Theory and Practice, Delhi: Macmillan India.
7) Reddy, Y . V . and G .V . Reddy (2019).The Rules of the Game: Indian Fiscal
Federalism, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
8) Sen, Tapas K. (2011). “Horizontal Imbalances in Indian Federalism”, in
Praveen Jha (ed.), Progressive Fiscal Policy in India , New Delhi: Sage
Publications, pp. 246-263.
9) Twelfth Finance Commission (2003), Fifty Years of Fiscal Federalism:
Finance Commissions of India , New Delhi: Government of India [This
publication contains ToR, composition, summarized approach, main
recommendations and action taken report of first 11 Finance Commissions
– excellent source for a history of Finance Commissions].
10) Source-GST Council.gov.om/sites/default/files/gst.update010719
12.10 ANSWERS OR HINTS TO CHECK YOUR
PROGRESS EXERCISES
Check Your Progress 1
1) See Section 12.1
2) See Section 12.2
3) See Sub-Section 12.2.2 and 12.2.3
4) See Sub-Section 12.2.4


--- Page 98 ---
97
Major Development on Union
State Relations
Check Your Progress 2
1) See Sub-Section 12.3.1
2) See Section 12.4
3) See Sub-Section 12.3.3
4) See Section 12.4
Check Your Progress 3
1) See Sub-Section 12.5.1
2) See Sub-Section 12.5.2
3) See Section 12.5


--- Page 99 ---
98
Monetary and Fiscal Policies
APPENDIX 12.1: TOR OF THE 14 TH FINANCE
COMMISSION
“4) The Commission shall make recommendations as to the following matters:
i) the distribution between the Union and the States of the net proceeds of
taxes which are to be, or may be, divided between them under Chapter
I, Part XII of the Constitution and the allocation between the States of
the respective shares of such proceeds;
ii) the principles which should govern the grants-in-aid of the revenues of
the States out of the Consolidated Fund of India and the sums to be paid
to the States which are in need of assistance by way of grants-in-aid of
their revenues under article 275 of the Constitution for purposes other
than those specified in the provisos to clause (1) of that article; and(iii)
the measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of a State to
supplement the resources of the Panchayat and Municipalities in the
State on the basis of the recommendations made by the Finance
Commission of the State.
5) The Commission shall review the state of the finances, deficit and debt levels
of the Union and the States, keeping in view, in particular, the fiscal
consolidation road map recommended by the Thirteenth Finance
Commission, and suggest measures for maintaining a stable and sustainable
fiscal environment consistent with equitable growth including suggestions
to amend the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Acts currently
in force and while doing so, the Commission may consider the effect of the
receipts and expenditure in the form of grants for creation of capital assets
on the deficits; and the Commission shall also consider and recommend
incentives and disincentives for States for observing the obligations laid
down in the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Acts.
6) In making its recommendations, the Commission shall have regard, among
other considerations, to:
i) the resources of the Central Government, for five years commencing
on 1 April 2015, on the basis of levels of taxation and non-tax revenues
likely to be reached during 2014-15;
ii) the demands on the resources of the Central Government, in particular,
on account of the expenditure on civil administration, defence, internal
and border security, debt-servicing and other committed expenditure
and liabilities;
iii) the resources of the State Governments and the demands on such
resources under different heads, including the impact of debt levels on
resource availability in debt stressed states, for the five years
commencing on 1 April 2015, on the basis of levels of taxation and
non-tax revenues likely to be reached during 2014-15;
iv) the objective of not only balancing the receipts and expenditure on
revenue account of all the States and the Union, but also generating
surpluses for capital investment;
v) the taxation efforts of the Central Government and each State
Government and the potential for additional resource mobilisation to


--- Page 100 ---
99
Major Development on Union
State Relations
improve the tax-Gross Domestic Product ratio in the case of the Union
and tax-Gross State Domestic Product ratio in the case of the States;
vi) the level of subsidies that are required, having regard to the need for
sustainable and inclusive growth, and equitable sharing of subsidies
between the Central Government and State Governments;
vii) the expenditure on the non-salary component of maintenance and upkeep
of capital assets and the non-wage related maintenance expenditure on
plan schemes to be completed by 31 March, 2015 and the norms on the
basis of which specific amounts are recommended for the maintenance
of the capital assets and the manner of monitoring such expenditure;
viii) the need for insulating the pricing of public utility services like drinking
water, irrigation, power and public transport from policy fluctuations
through statutory provisions;
ix) the need for making the public sector enterprises competitive and market
oriented; listing and disinvestment; and the relinquishing of non-priority
enterprises;
x) the need to balance management of ecology, environment and climate
change consistent with sustainable economic development; and
xi) the impact of the proposed Goods and Services Tax on the finances of
Centre and States and the mechanism for compensation in case of any
revenue loss.
7) In making its recommendations on various matters, the Commission shall
generally take the base of population figures as of 1971 in all cases where
population is a factor for determination of devolution of taxes and duties
and grants-in-aid; however, the Commission may also take into account the
demographic changes that have taken place subsequent to 1971.
8) The Commission may review the present Public Expenditure Management
systems in place including the budgeting and accounting standards and
practices; the existing system of classification of receipts and expenditure;
linking outlays to outputs and outcomes; best practices within the country
and internationally, and make appropriate recommendations thereon.
9) The Commission may review the present arrangements as regards financing
of Disaster Management with reference to the funds constituted under the
Disaster Management Act,2005 (53 of 2005), and make appropriate
recommendations thereon.
10) The Commission shall indicate the basis on which it has arrived at its findings
and make available the State-wise estimates of receipts and expenditure.”
The following additional item was added to the ToR of the Commission vide
President’s Order published under S.O. No. 1424(E) dated 2 June 2014 (Annex
1.2):
“Para 5 A. The Commission shall also take into account the resources available
to the successor or re-organised States on re-organisation of the State of Andhra
Pradesh in accordance with the Andhra Pradesh Re-organisation Act, 2014 (6 of
2014) and the Ministry of Home Affairs notification number S.O. 655 (E) dated
4 March, 2014 and make recommendations, for successor or re-organised States,
on the matters under reference in this notification”.


--- Page 101 ---
100
Monetary and Fiscal Policies
APPENDIX 12.2: TOR OF THE 15 TH FINANCE
COMMISSION
“4) The Commission shall make recommendations as to the following matters,
namely:—
i) The distribution between the Union and the States of the net proceeds
of taxes which are to be, or may be, divided between them under Chapter
I, Part XII of the Constitution and the allocation between the States of
the respective shares of such proceeds;
ii) The principles which should govern the grants-in-aid of the revenues
of the States out of the Consolidated Fund of India and the sums to be
paid to the States by way of grants-in-aid of their revenues under Article
275 of the Constitution for purposes other than those specified in the
provisos to clause (1) of that article; and
iii) The measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of a State to
supplement there sources of the Panchayats and Municipalities in the
State on the basis of the recommendations made by the Finance
Commission of the State.
5) The Commission shall review the current status of the finance, deficit, debt
levels, cash balances and fiscal discipline efforts of the Union and the States,
and recommend a fiscal consolidation roadmap for sound fiscal management,
taking into account the responsibility of the Central Government and State
Governments to adhere to appropriate levels of general and consolidated
government debt and deficit levels, while fostering higher inclusive growth
in the country, guided by the principles of equity, efficiency and transparency.
The Commission may also examine whether revenue deficit grants be
provided at all.
6) While making its recommendations, the Commission shall have regard,
among other considerations, to:
i) The resources of the Central Government and the State Governments
for the five years commencing on 1st April 2020 on the basis of the
levels of tax and the non-tax revenues likely to be reached by 2024-25.
In the context of both tax and non-tax revenues, the Commission will
also take into consideration their potential and fiscal capacity;
ii) The demand on the resources of the Central Government particularly
on account of defence, internal security, infrastructure, railways, climate
change, commitments towards administration of UTs without legislature,
and other committed expenditure and liabilities;
iii) The demand on the resources of the State Governments, particularly on
account of financing socioeconomic development and critical
infrastructure, assets maintenance expenditure, balanced regional
development and impact of the debt and liabilities of their public utilities;
iv) The impact on the fiscal situation of the Union Government of
substantially enhanced tax devolution to States following
recommendations of the 14th Finance Commission, coupled with the


--- Page 102 ---
101
Major Development on Union
State Relations
continuing imperative of the national development programme including
New India – 2022;
v) The impact of the GST, including payment of compensation for possible
loss of revenues for 5 years, and abolition of a number of cesses,
earmarking thereof for compensation and other structural reforms
programme, on the finances of Centre and States; and
vi) The conditions that GoI may impose on the States while providing
consent under Article 293(3) of the Constitution.
7) The Commission may consider proposing measurable performance-based
incentives for States, at the appropriate level of government, in following
areas:
i) Efforts made by the States in expansion and deepening of tax net under
GST;
ii) Efforts and Progress made in moving towards replacement rate of
population growth;
iii) Achievements in implementation of flagship schemes of Government
of India, disaster resilient infrastructure, sustainable development goals,
and quality of expenditure;
iv) Progress made in increasing capital expenditure, eliminating losses of
power sector, and improving the quality of such expenditure in
generating future income streams;
v) Progress made in increasing tax/non-tax revenues, promoting savings
by adoption of Direct Benefit Transfers and Public Finance Management
System, promoting digital economy and removing layers between the
government and the beneficiaries;
vi) Progress made in promoting ease of doing business by effecting related
policy and regulatory changes and promoting labour intensive growth;
vii) Provision of grants in aid to local bodies for basic services, including
quality human resources, and implementation of performance grant
system in improving delivery of services;
viii) Control or lack of it in incurring expenditure on populist measures; and
ix) Progress made in sanitation, solid waste management and bringing in
behavioural change to end open defecation.
8) The Commission shall use the population data of 2011 while making its
recommendations.
9) The Commission may review the present arrangements on financing Disaster
Management initiatives, with reference to the funds constituted under the
Disaster Management Act, 2005 (53 of 2005), and make appropriate
recommendations thereon.
10) The Commission shall indicate the basis on which it has arrived at its findings
and make available the Statewise estimates of receipts and expenditure.”


--- Page 103 ---
102
Monetary and Fiscal Policies Subsequent to the publication of these ToR, a fresh Term of Reference was added
for the consideration of the Commission. The Commission was asked “to examine
whether a separate mechanism for funding of defence and internal security ought
to be set up and if so, how such a mechanism could be operationalised.” Also,
the change in the status of Jammu and Kashmir from a State to a Union Territory
necessitated changes in the 15
th FC methodology, since Union Territories are
outside the purview of the Finance Commission.
