--- Page 101 ---
 
 
101
Social Sector
24.4  HEALTH 
One of the important dimensions of quality of life is health. A healthy 
individual can contribute effectively to production of goods and services. 
Investment in health is, therefore, an essential instrument of raising the quality 
of life of people and the productivity of the labour force. What is the health 
status of the population? What are the challenges to the health of the population 
and how are these being tackled? What kind of data is available about these 
aspects of the population, the health infrastructure and the efforts being made 
to deal with problems of health? What is the impact of these on the health 
situation, especially of women and children? The World Health Organisation 
(WHO), India website (http://www.who.int/countries/ind/en/ ) provides country 
statistics on health profile, nutrition, mortality and burden of disease and risk 
factors like those of alcohol and tobacco. The Central Bureau of Health 
Intelligence of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare publishes the 
“National Health Profile (NHP) of India” every year. The publications 
“Sample Registration System (SRS): Statistical Reports”, “SRS 
Compendium of India’s Fertility & Mortality Indicators, 1971-2001”, 
Mortality Statistical and Cause of Death”, SRS Bulletin and the Social & 
Cultural Tables (C Series Tables) of Census 2001 of the Office of the 
Registrar General of India (RGI), Ministry of Home Affairs and the “Report 
on the National Family Health Survey (NFHS-4) – 2014-15” of the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare contain a large amount of information on these 
aspects of health, at the State level. For district level information, you can see 
the reports of the Annual Health Survey (AHS) of the ORGI and the District 
Level Health Survey (DLHS) of the MoH&FW. The Government of India 
launched the National Rural Health Mission in 2005, which has now been 
expanded to cover urban areas and called the National Health Mission. From 
2005, the MoH&FW publishes, as an offshoot of the NHM, the Rural Health 
Statistics (RHS) report each year. 
24.4.1 Health Infrastructure 
The RHS of the MoH&FW provide the following types of data: 
i) Demographic indicators – state-wise number of villages, rural and urban 
population, population growth rates and density, estimates of crude birth 
rates, crude death rates and infant mortality rates; 
ii) Rural health infrastructure – number of health sub-centres in each 5-year 
plan period, number of Primary Health Centres, number of community 
Health Centres, number of sub-centres, PHCs and CHCs functioning at the 
end of the year, number of sub-divisional hospitals, district hospitals and 
mobile medical teams, shortfall in health infrastructure, building position 
of sub-centres, PHCs and CHCs; 
iii) Health manpower in rural areas – Health workers (female)/ANM at sub 
centre, PHCs, Health workers (male) at sub centre, number of sub-centres/ 
PHCs without ANMs/Health worker (Male), health assistants/LHVs at 
PHCs, doctors at PHCs, number of PHCs without doctors/ lab technicians/ 
pharmacists, number of PHCs with AYUSH facility, surgeons at CHCs, 
obstrreticians and gynaecologists at CHCs, physicians at CHCs, 
paediatricians at CHCs, general dutty medical officers at CHCs, 
radiographers at CHCs, pharmacists at CHCs and PHCs, lab technicians at 
CHCs, nursing staff at PHCs and CHCs, etc.; 


--- Page 102 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
102 
iv) Facilities available at sub centre – number of sub centres functioning, with 
ANM quarter, ANMs living in sub centre quarters, number of sub centres 
functioning as per IPHS norms, number of sub centres with regular water 
supply, with electricity, with all-weather motorable approach road, number 
of PHCs functioning, with labour room, with operation theatre, with at 
least 4 beds, regular water supply, with electricity, with all-weather 
motorable approach road, with telephone, with computer, with referral 
transport, registered RKS, functioning as per IPHS (Indian Public Health 
Standard) norms; 
v) Facilities available at CHCs - number of CHCs functioning, with all four 
specialists, with computer/ statistical assistant for MIS/ Accountant, with 
functional laboratory, with functional OT, with functional labour room, 
with at least 30 beds, with functional X-ray machine, with quarters for 
specialist doctors, with referral transport, registered RKS, functioning as 
per IPHS norms, number of CHCs having a regular supply of allopathic 
drugs for common ailments, with AYUSH drugs for common ailments;  
vi) Training of medical and paramedical personnel –ANM/ HW (F) training 
schools funded by Government of India, established by Government of 
India, health and family welfare training centres, MPW (M) training 
centres;  
vii) Rural health care – some parameters of achievement – classification of 
States/UTs by average rural population covered by a sub centre, by a PHC, 
by a CHC, average radial distance covered by PHCs, ratio of LHV/ health 
assistant training schools to LHV/ health assistant, etc.; 
viii) Expenditure on health and family welfare – overall and on individual 
programmes like malaria control, filarial control and national leprosy 
eradication programme. 
24.4.2 Public Health, Morbidity and Mortality Indicators 
i) Progress of the programme for vaccination of children and pregnant 
women; 
ii) Time series on the number of notified/reported cases of and deaths due to 
diseases like cholera, small pox, acute diarrhoeal diseases, malaria, 
kalaazar, Japanese encephalitis and meningitis; 
iii) The number of cases detected, treated and discharged in respect of 
diseases like leprosy and tuberculosis; 
iv) The number of patients treated, discharged and deaths due to (a) different 
types of cancer in specialized cancer hospitals, (b) different types of 
mental diseases, and (c) communicable diseases like diphtheria, 
poliomyelitis, tetanus (neonatal and others), hepatitis and rabies; 
v) Progress in the National Aids Control Programme and other National 
Control/Eradication programmes; 
vi) Utilization by beneficiaries of facilities provided by CGHS, ESI scheme, 
Control/Eradication programmes; 
vii) Incidence of morbidity and mortality by causes in zonal Railway 
hospitals; 


--- Page 103 ---
 
 
103
Social Sectorviii) Incidence of morbidity by diseases in the ESI scheme; 
ix) Causes of death statistics: distribution of deaths due to (a) selected 
diseases by age and sex, (b) specific causes under the group of diseases 
peculiar to infancy, and (c) causes related to childbirth, (d) causes related 
to childbirth and pregnancy (maternal mortality) and (e) accidents due to 
different types of natural and other causes (RGI); 
x) Medical certification of cause of death – distribution of such deaths by 
age, sex and major cause groups (18 groups of causes) and the extent of 
coverage of such certification to total deaths in each of the 18 groups 
(RGI); 
xi) Birth Rates (BRs), Death Rates (DRs) and natural growth rates and State-
wise BRs and DRs (from SRS, RGI); 
xii) Mortality Indicators like the Crude Death Rate (CDR), Infant Mortality 
Rate (IMR) 34, Nano-Natal Rate (NNR) 35, Post-Natal Rate (PNR) 36, Still 
Birth Rate (SBR) 37, Age-Specific Death Rates (ASDRs) and Maternal 
Mortality Rates (MMR) (from SRS, RGI); 
xiii) Fertility data – 2001 (F series Tables) (census 2001); 
xiv) Disabled population in India by type of disability, sex and age in 
general/SC/ST population and a further classification by marital status for 
the general population (from Census 2001); and 
xv) Expectation of Life at Birth (e 0) 38, expectation of life at ages 10, 20, 30, 
40, 50 and 60 for males, females and persons (from RGI). 
24.4.3 National Family Health Survey (NFHS) 
What is the impact of the efforts made to expand the size and reach and also 
enhance the quality of the health services on the health status of the family, 
especially of women and children? The first National Family Health Survey 
(NFHS-1) conducted in 1992-93 succeeded in answering this question and also 
in building up an important demographic and health database in India. This 
success paved the way for the conduct of the second National Family  
Health Survey in 1998-99 (NFHS-2), third NFHS in 2005-06 and NFHS-4 
in 2014-15, to strengthen this database further and facilitate implementation 
and monitoring of population and health programmes in the country. NFHS – 4 
is covering, for the first time, all the 35 States and UTs as per Census 2011. 
The survey is based on a representative sample of 5,60,000 households, up 
from about 1,90,000 households of NFHS-3. The survey provides State-level 
estimates of demographic and health parameters and also data on various socio-
economic and programmatic factors that are crucial for bringing about desired 
changes in India’s demographic and health situation.NFHS-1 and NFHS-2 
were funded by the United States Agency for International Development, with 
supplemental funding from UNICEF. NFHS-3 funding was provided by the 
United States Agency for International Development, the Department for 
                                                            
 
34 Relates to the number of children who die before their first birthday. 
35 Relates to the number of children who die in the first month of their life. 
36 Relates to children who die after the first month of life but before their first birthday. 
37 Relates to children who are born dead. 
38 The number of years that a person born today will, on the average live. Similary, e i., (i=10, 
20, 30, 40, 50, 60 ….) is the number of years that a person aged i years today will, on an 
average live. 


--- Page 104 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
104 
International Development (United Kingdom), the Bill and Melinda Gates 
Foundation, UNICEF, the United Nations Population Fund, and the 
Government of India. Assistance for the HIV component of the NFHS-3 survey 
was provided by the National AIDS Control Organisation and the National 
AIDS Research Institute 39. The field data collection in the NFHS is conducted 
by different research organisations. A total of 18 such organisations collected 
data in NFHS-3 during December 2005 to August 2006. It has been planned to 
conduct the NFHS-4 through 11 reputed field agencies like the AMS, DRS, 
EHI, GFK, GIM, IIHMR, NIELSON, SPVM, RDI, SPYM and VIMARSSH. 
NFHS-3 provides 
a) urban and rural estimates for most States, (b) separate estimates for 8 cities, 
and (c) estimates for the slum areas. Besides a national report, reports are 
prepared for the States . The NFHS reports can be downloaded free from the 
site http://www.rchiips.org/nfhs/sub_report.shtml. The kind of data on health 
and nutrition status of women and children and estimates of parameters related 
to these presented by the NFHS, are indicated in brief below: 
i) Educational level of the household population, school attendance of boys 
and girls and reasons for not attending school; 
ii) Distribution of housing by availability of basic amenities 40, ownership of 
agricultural land, house and livestock and durable goods; standard of 
living indicators based on these and habits like drinking, tobacco and 
smoking; 
iii) Distance of households from the nearest health facility and distribution of 
rural residents living in villages that have selected facilities and services; 
iv) Age at first marriage of (women) respondents, their exposure to mass 
media, their employment status and aspects of their empowerment or lack 
of it, including domestic violence; 
v) Current fertility, variation in current fertility by various factors, fertility 
trends, pattern of outcome of pregnancy, median number of children ever 
born and living to ever married women, patterns of birth order and birth 
intervals, median age of women at the first birth and the last birth of 
child, patterns of fertility preference and sex (of the child) preference; 
vi) Knowledge of use and time of first use of contraception, reasons for 
discontinuation of, or for not using contraception; 
vii) Estimates of age-specific death rates, crude death rates, infant and child 
mortality41; 
viii) Morbidity by selected diseases and its variation over States; 
ix) Vaccination of children, vitamin A supplementation for children, 
prevalence of acute respiratory infection, fever and diarrhoea, treatment 
of diarroea and awareness of treatment like ORS packets; 
                                                            
 
39  See the website http://www.rchiips.org/nfhs/nfhs3.shtml which provides details of all the 4 
NFHS surveys conducted so far. 
40  Electricity, source of drinking water, time taken to get water, method of purifying water, 
sanitation facility, fuel for cooking, type of house (pucca , semi-pucca and kutcha) and 
persons per room. 
41  Child mortality relates to children who die between their first and 4 th birthday. Under-five 
mortality relates to children who die between their 4th and 5th birthdays. 


--- Page 105 ---
 
 
105
Social Sectorx) Knowledge about AIDS and ways of avoiding it; 
xi) Food consumption of women, nutritional status of women, anaemia 
among them, iodisation of salt consumed in households and body mass 
index42 - an indicator of the heath status of women; 
xii) Median duration of breastfeeding – overall and in different States, type of 
food consumed by children, nutritional status of children, anaemia among 
them and indicators of acute and chronic malnutrition among children – 
weight for age index, height for age index and weight for height index43; 
xiii) Health problems of pregnancy, antenatal care, assistance during delivery, 
place of delivery, post-partum care, and care and treatment of reproductive 
health problems; and 
xiv) Couple protection rate44. 
It is necessary to make a reference here again to the NHDR 2001 of the 
Planning Commission and the HDRs of the State Governments for their 
importance in the field of health, education and other sectors. 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) Indicate the publications which contain the data on different aspects of 
health. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) What type of database is provided by National Family Health Survey? 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
                                                            
 
42  “Body mass index (BMI) = [weight in kgms.] / [height in metres)(height in metres)]. See 
Unit 4 on Poverty & Inequality – Policy Implications” (section on human development 
indicators) in Block 1 of MEC – 005 on Indian Economic Policy in your first year course. 
43  The National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad has recommended that the nutritional status 
of the international reference population recommended by the WHO could be used as the 
standard for India. The Weight for Age Index  is a composite measure that takes into 
account both chronic and acute malnutrition. Children who are more than 2 standard 
deviations (s.d.) below the median value of the index for the reference population are 
“underweight”. The Height for Age Index  measures linear growth retardation. Children 
who are more than 2 s.d. below the median value of the index for the reference population 
are considered short for their age, or are “stunted”. This is chronic undernutrition. The 
Weight for Height Index examines body mass in relation to body height. Children who are 
more than 2 s.d. below the median value of the index for the reference population are 
considered too thin or “wasted”. This is acute undernutrition. (NFHS – II). See the 
preceding footnote on BMI also. 
44  The percentage of currently married women aged 15 to 49 years using family planning 
methods at the time of the survey. 


--- Page 106 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
106 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) What do you mean by the term ‘weight for age index’? 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
24.5 SHELTER AND AMENITIES 
Another important dimension of the quality of life is shelter and access to 
amenities like safe drinking water, toilet, adequate lighting and safe fuel for 
cooking. We have already discussed this in sub-section (d) under the section on 
“Levels of Inequality in Non-income Aspects of Life” in Unit 4 on “Poverty 
and Inequality: Policy Implications” in Block 1 of MEC – 005 on “Indian 
Economic Policy” in your first year course. The population Census, from 1991 
onwards, have collected data on housing and amenities of the population 
during the house-listing and housing census phase, i.e., in the years 1990, 2000 
and 2010. From Census 2001 onwards, results on parameters related to this 
aspect is disseminated for the urban slums as well. While Census 2001 results 
on urban slums relate to the towns with 20,000 or more population, all statutory 
towns were considered for identifying the urban slums and disseminating 
results for them. The results based on Census 2011 on housing stock, amenities 
and assets, at district level can be downloaded from http://www.censusindia. 
gov.in/2011census/hlo/HLO_Tables.html. This site alsso provides such tables 
for the urban slums. While the Population Census provides data at a much 
disaggregated level, a higher quantum of information is provided by the 
surveys conducted by the NSSO in their surveys on housing condition and 
condition of urban slums. The NSS survey reports based on surveys conducted 
in the 49th round (1993), 58th round (2002) and 69th round (2012)provide results 
at State/UT level on these parameters. The 69 th round of NSS survey has 
published three reports – (i) “ Key indicators of drinking water, sanitation, 
hygiene and housing condition in India”, (ii) “Drinking water, sanitation, 
hygiene and housing condition in India” and (iii) “Housing condition and 
amenities in India” – contain the latest data on housing conditions including 
those of dwelling in slums. The NFHS also gives some data on housing and 
amenities. These sources of data provide the following kind of information 
(data presented for rural/urban/urban slum/other urban areas in the case of 
items a to f): 
a) Distribution of households by type of structure –pucca, semi – pucca and 
kutchha; 
b) Access to toilet facility – SC/ST/other households – within the premises or 
not; type of latrine; 
c) Access to safe drinking water – SC/ST/other households, major source of 
drinking water; 
d) Use of electricity for lighting – SC/ST/other households; 
e) SC/ST/other households with no access to electricity, safe drinking water 
and toilet; 


--- Page 107 ---
 
 
107
Social Sectorf) SC/ST/other households with access to electricity, safe drinking water and 
toilet; 
g) Percentage of villages connected by roads45; 
h) Type of slum – notified or non-notified -, availability of infrastructure like 
sewerage system, drainage system, means of garbage disposal and pucca 
road(s) within and approaching the slum, how has the slum been there, and 
whether the land on which the slum is located is owned by Local Bodies, 
State Government, etc.; 
i) Duration of residence of the household in the slum, reasons for coming to 
the slum, the place from which the household came, whether the 
household had any document of identification and whether it had at any 
time tried to leave the slum; 
j) Possession of durable goods and rent being paid for the premises; and 
k) Workforce participation rates, female workforce participation rates, 
workers and non-workers and workers by broad categories of economic 
activity, including household, industry; and demographic features of the 
slum population like sex ratio – overall and for children in the age group 
0-6, etc. 
24.6 SOCIAL CONSEQUENCES OF 
DEVELOPMENT 
The development experience of the last few decades show that the cost of 
development is not shared equally by all sections of the society. Often the 
burden of the cost falls almost entirely on the poor and the voiceless. The best 
example of inequitable sharing of the burden of the cost of development 
programmes is provided by the current controversy over the Sardar Sarovar 
Project (SSP) over the river Narmada and the struggle of the Narmada Bachao 
Andolan (NBA) on behalf of the people displaced by the construction of the 
dam and the consequent submerging of their villages and their lands or are 
likely to be displaced with each installment of rise in the height of the dam. 
The other recent example that invited wide attention is the acquisition of the 
lands of tribals in Orissa for the industries in Kalinganagar in the State. The 
problem of people ousted from the land submerged by the water filling the 
reservoirs created by the dams or, for that matter, people whose lands are 
acquired by the State for purposes of development (building factories, dams 
etc.,), called “oustees”, has been coming up ever since the first development 
projects were taken up in 1951. The State promised jobs to the oustees in the 
industries that came up in their lands in addition to compensation for the land 
acquired or alternative land to prevent loss of their livelihood. The question 
that has continued to agitate the minds of most development analysts is about 
the extent to which the rehabilitation of the displaced or the “oustees” has been 
successfully completed. What data are there on this vital question? 
It may be mentioned that “oustees” were one of the priority categories for 
registration as jobseekers in the employment exchanges and placement in 
employment. The  DGE&T, the organization concerned with employment 
exchange at the national level, is one source where some information on (i) 
                                                             
45  Roads are all categories of roads surfaced or unsurfaced, district road, highways and rural 
roads. (Basic Road Statistics of India, Ministry of Surface Transport, New Delhi.) 


--- Page 108 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
108 
how many of them were registered as job seekers under these categories, (ii) 
how many of these were actually placed in a job and (iii) how many languished 
on the “live registers” of employment exchanges for a long time before passing 
into oblivion, because if he or she did not renew her registration at specified 
intervals he or she would have ceased to be on the “live” register of job 
seekers. Past data with the DGE&T in the Ministry of Labour might show the 
proportion of those who just ceased to be on the register. This source of data, 
however, would have represented a very small part of whatever rehabilitation 
was done, because the kind of vacancies that can be filled through employment 
exchanges is restricted to jobs in Government not filled through competitive 
examinations, public service commission and other commissions/recruitment 
boards and jobs up to a specified salary level in public sector undertakings. The 
private sector is not obliged to fill its vacancies through the employment 
exchanges. Other than this source, Government – the Central or the State 
Governments – do not seem to have any data on the number of families which 
were displaced and the number rehabilitated. Data maintained by the State 
Governments concerned with the implementation of rehabilitation under, for 
example, the Sardar Sarovar Project, do not seem to reflect the actual situation 
on the ground, as has been shown by the Report of the Group of Ministers 
which toured some of the affected areas in Madhya Pradesh in April, 200646. 
It was in 1994 that a study supported by the Indian Council of Social 
Science Research (ICSSR)  attempted estimates of the extent of displacement 
of families between 1951 and 1990 due to projects like mines, dams, industries 
and wild life sanctuaries. It also estimated the proportion of those displaced in 
the Fifties and the Sixties who were resettled till 1980. It pointed out that there 
was practically no improvement in the Eighties. A study on development-
induced displacement in West Bengal, between 1947 and 2000, conducted by 
a team led by Walter Fernandes has made estimates of (a) the number of 
people adversely affected by projects, (b) the number physically displaced, (c) 
the number resettled by the projects, (d) the rest that had been left to fend for 
itself following displacement, and (e) the proportion of those in (d) who were 
dalits and tribals. Yet another study published in Economic and Political 
Weekly by Manipadma Jena quotes official figures (of the Government of 
Orissa) of families displaced due to development projects between 1950 and 
1993 and of the extent of land that had to be acquired by the Government for 
the purpose. Jena’s study also presents data on (a) the number of villages 
affected by the Hirakud Dam that was constructed between 1948 and 1957, (b) 
the number of families and people whose livelihood was disrupted due to 
displacement, (c) the number of families (all belonging to Scheduled 
Castes/Tribes) which were displaced forcibly by police, and (d) the number of 
families resettled in rehabilitation camps47. 
This aspect of development projects will cast greater responsibilities on the 
respective project authorities in these matters and closer monitoring of the 
implementation of resettlement plans. These will necessarily require the setting 
                                                            
 
46  The Hindu, Chennai edition of Monday, the 17 th April, 2006 carried the full text of ‘the 
Group of Ministers’ (GoM’s) Report on the OP-ED page. 
47  The studies referred to in this paragraph and their contents are taken from the article 
“Creating Dispensable Citizens” by Usha Ramanathan, in the Chennai edition of The 
Hindu of Friday April 14, 2006 .UshaRamanathan is an Honorary Fellow of the Centre for 
the Study of Developing Societies, New Delhi. The estimates made by the studies are given 
in the article. These have not been indicated here as the purpose of this Unit is only to 
indicate the very few sources of data that are available on this important social aspect of 
development and not to discuss the problem. 


--- Page 109 ---
 
 
109
Social Sectorup of a reliable and transparent system of collection, compilation and analysis 
of statistics relating to displacement of people due to the project, their 
demographic, social, cultural and economic profiles, their resettlement in 
alternative livelihood, number absorbed in employment in the industrial 
establishment(s) for which the lands of the oustees were acquired, details 
relating to the levels of living of the oustees in the area of resettlement in terms 
of parameters like incomes, access to basic needs of life like water, shelter, 
education for their children and health and medicare at least until a reasonable 
number of years after resettlement, the time taken and the expenditure incurred 
for resettlement and so on. 
24.7  ENVIRONMENT 
The process of development adversely affects the environment and through it 
the quality of life of society. For instance the excessive use of fertilizers and 
pesticides rob the soil of its nutrients. Letting sewers and drainage and industrial 
effluents without prior treatment into rivers and water bodies pollute these water 
bodies causing destruction of aquatic life and endanger the health of people using 
such polluted water. The recent outcry in Tirupur, near Coimbatore, a place well 
known for garment exports, against untreated effluents from garment factories 
being let into the river used for drinking purposes is a case in point. The exhaust 
fumes containing Carbon Monoxide (CO) and lead (Pb) particles let in to the 
air we breathe by vehicles using petrol or diesel is an example of air pollution. 
The best example of industrial pollution through insufficient safety measures is 
the Bhopal gas disaster where lethal gases leaking from a factory’s storage 
cylinder killed many people immediately and maimed many others for life. The 
forest cover of the country is continuously getting reduced due to 
indiscriminate felling of trees leading to reduction in rainfall and changes in 
rainfall pattern, besides climatic changes. The destruction of mangroves along 
seacoasts for housing/tourism development often leads to soil erosion along the 
coast by the sea. The adverse effects of current models of development on 
environment and the realization of the need to take note of the cost to 
development represented by such effects have now led to the development of 
environmental economics as a new discipline in economics. 
The system of national accounts currently in use throughout the world, suffers 
from extreme narrowness. Vast quantities of information relevant for economic 
evaluation do not appear in them. Some don't because the appropriate data are 
hard, even impossible, to collect; but others don't because until recently the 
theory and practice of economic evaluation didn't ask for them. The demand for 
green national accounts has arisen because of a growing recognition that 
contemporary national accounts are an unsatisfactory basis for economic 
evaluation. The qualifier “green” signals that we should be especially 
concerned about the absence of information on society's use of the natural 
environment. As an extension of national accounting, the development of green 
accounting framework and related researches are therefore being undertaken 
around the world. The CSO, for the first time in India, have published the 
Report “Green National Accounts in India” in the year 2013. You can 
download a copy of this report from the Social Statistics Division of the CSO. 
The Central and State Pollution Control Boards and the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests (MOEF) evolve and, monitor implementation of 
policies to protect the environment. Statistics on environment are collected 
through this process by the agencies mentioned above and the CSO. The 


--- Page 110 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
110 
annual reports of the MOEF 48 and the Compendium on Environment 
Statistics, India 2003 published by the CSO from time to time are excellent 
sources of data on environment. The latter especially is very comprehensive 
and includes a very informative write up. The Compendium (and the annual 
report of MOEF) can be accessed in the respective website of the two 
organizations. The type of data on environment available from these 
publications are mentioned below by way of illustration: 
a) Ambient Air Quality Status [concentration of Sulphur di-oxide, Nitogen 
di-oxide and Solid Particulate Matter 49 (SPM) in air] in major cities of 
India; 
b) Percentage of petrol-driven two-wheelers, three wheelers and four-
wheelers meeting CO emission standards; and 
c) Water quality of Yamuna river (in the Delhi stretch) in respect of selective 
physio-chemical parameters between April, 1998 and March, 1999 – 
dissolved oxygen (milligrams/litre), Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD) 
(mg/l), faecal coliforms50 (number/100ml), total coliforms (number/100ml) 
and ammonical nitrogen (mg/l). 
24.8  QUALITY OF LIFE 
We have already looked at several of the factors determining the quality of life 
of the people – education, health, employment, shelter and amenities and 
environment. We have also referred to the plight of displaced people uprooted 
from their normal life by development projects. One other factor, an important 
one, is the level of income or consumption. We have already looked at the data 
available on this aspect of life in the Unit on “Poverty and Inequality: Policy 
Implications” in Block 1 of MEC-005 on “Indian Economic Policy” – A 
compulsory course in first year. The relevant data are available from successive 
quiquennial surveys of the NSSO on consumer expenditure, namely, those on 
levels of consumption of different MPCE classes. That Unit also discusses 
dimensions of poverty and inequalities in income (consumption) and non-
income aspects of life and about HDIs measuring shortfalls in human 
development in the population, Gender Development Indices (GDI) measuring 
gender discrimination, BMIs evaluating the health status of women and the 
measures, Weight for Age Index Height for Age Index and Weight for Height 
Index gauging the nutritional status of children. All these measures are also 
available from these sources, namely, NSSO, the Planning commission and the 
National Human Development Report 2001 and those of the State 
Governments for judging the quality of life of the Scheduled Castes and Tribes. 
The reports (prepared every year) of the Commission for Scheduled Castes and 
Tribes provide (review) data on: 
i) the progress in education of these sections of society; 
ii) Progress in the utilization of the reservation quotas in different services of 
the Governments and the public sector undertakings and the efficacy of 
measures taken by Government in enabling members of the weaker 
sections of society in gaining access to these opportunities; 
                                                            
 
48 The latest report of 2013-14 can be accessed at http://www.moef.nic.in/sites/default/files/ 
annual_report/AR-2013-14-Eng.pdf.  
49  SPM consists of metallic oxide silicon, calcium and other deleterious metals. 
50  The most common contamination in water is from disease-bearing human wastes which is 
usually detected by measuring faecal coliform levels. 
