--- Page 60 ---
 
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
60 
22.4  LET US SUM UP  
The major efforts to collect data on different aspects of the agricultural sector 
are the quinquennial agricultural census, the quinquennial livestock census, the 
cost of cultivation studies, annual estimates of crop production and the 
integrated sample survey to estimate the production of major livestock 
products. Most of the data flowing from these efforts relate to production, 
inputs for production, land utilization patterns, intensity of land use, irrigation, 
costs and pricing of agricultural produce, procurement and distribution, 
subsidies and credit are found in the two publications “Agricultural Statistics 
at a Glance” (ASG)  and “Basic Animal Husbandry Statistics” (BAHS) . 
Statistics on the characteristics of land holdings of different size with reference 
to the parameters referred to above are also available in ASG. More detailed 
information in this regard, collected in the succcessive  agricultural census are 
available in the Ministry’s website. Similarly, detailed information relating to 
sub-sectors – livestock, poultry and fishery as also agricultural implements, 
collected in the livestock censuses, are available in the website of the 
Ministry, though some information relating to the earlier census are available 
in ASG and BAHS of relevant years . Data on credit flowing to the 
agricultural sector are available in the RBI Handbook of Statistics on the 
Indian Economy  and NABARD’s Publications . Another source containing 
comprehensive information on agriculture at the global level is the FAO 
statistical yearbooks published by the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation. 
The most detailed data available in the industrial sector relates to the factory 
sector provided by ASI. The multi-variable data covers about 30 characteristics 
– investment, inputs, output, gross and net value added, employment, factor 
shares, net value added at 3 or 4-digit NIC code levels by States and Union 
territories. Quick estimates of monthly production in selected industries and the 
Index of Industrial Production are available within six weeks of the reference 
month from the CSO and revised in the next two months. The State 
Governments and Union Territory Administrations are also taking steps to 
prepare and release monthly IIPs that are comparable to the national level IIP. 
Some have already started releasing such estimates. The fourth census of 
micro, small and medium enterprises (MSME) relating to 2006-07 is the 
most recent and comprehensive source for data on production, employment and 
exports of the small-scale sector. Reports from the NSSO on surveys of the 
unorganized sector carried out once in five or six years provide useful data on 
the characteristics of this sector. Enquiries covering the entire industrial sector 
or the organized industrial sector such as the population census, NSSO 
surveys on employment , the Economic Census and the Employment 
Market Information Programme of the Ministry of Labour & Employment 
provide data only on employment. The RBI handbook gives data on industrial 
credit and financing of industrial capital. The CMIE (EIS) volumes on 
industry, one on financial aggregates and the other on market size and 
shares provide a fund of data on finance and market competition aspects of 
industry. At the global level, the International Labour Organisation (ILO) 
provides statistics on employment and the UNIDO provides statistics on total 
factor productivity. 
 
  


--- Page 61 ---
 
 
 
61
Agricultural and 
Industrial Data22.5  EXERCISES  
1) Which major efforts have been made to collect the data on different 
aspects of agricultural sector? 
2) Discuss the characteristics of data flowing from the agencies involved in 
compilation of agriculture data. 
3)  “The detailed data available in the industrial sector relates to the factory 
sector” explain. 
4) Do you think that data available on unorganized sector is inadequate? 
What suggestion would you like to make in this regard? 
22.6 SOME USEFUL BOOKS  
Amitabh Kundu & 
Alakh Sharma (Ed.) 
(2001) 
: Informal Sector in India – Perspectives & 
Policies, Institute for Human Development & 
Institute of Applied Manpower Research, IP 
Estate, Ring Road, New Delhi. 
____National Sample 
Survey Office (NSSO) 
(Various issues) 
: Survey Reports of unorganized sector 
enterprise surveys NSSO, Ministry of 
Statistics & Programme Implementation, Govt 
of India, Sardar Patel Bhavan, New Delhi. 
Department of 
Agriculture & Coop 
: Agricultural Statistics At a Glance, Directorate 
of Economics & Statistics (DES), Ministry of 
Agriculture, Govt. of India, Krishi Bhavan, 
New Delhi. Cost of Cultivation in India, DES, 
Ministry of Agriculture & Cooperation, New 
Delhi. 
Reports of the Commission on Agricultural 
Costs and Prices (CACP), DES, Ministry of 
Agriculture & Cooperation, New Delhi. 
Indian Horticulture Data Base, Ministry of 
Agriculture & Cooperation, New Delhi 
___Ministry of Finance : Economic Survey, Ministry of Finance, North 
Block, New Delhi. 
___Reserve Bank of 
India (various issues) 
: RBI Handbook of Statistics on the Indian 
Economy. The Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai 
www.mospi.nic.in : Website of the Ministry of Statistics & 
Programme Implementation. (even the letters 
cso in google search will lead you to the (CSO 
website). 
eands.dacnet.nic.in : Directorate of Economics and Statistics, 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, 
Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India 
www.wrmin.nic.in : Website of the Ministry of Water Resources. 
www.rbi.org.in : Website of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). 
www.fao.org : UN Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) 
website. 


--- Page 62 ---
 
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
62 
www.ilo.org : UN International Labour Organisation (ILO) 
website. 
www.unido.org : UN Industrial Development Organisation 
(UNIDO) website. 
22.7 ANSWERS OR HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) The Directorate of Economic and Statistics in the Department of 
Agriculture and Statistics and Animal Husbandry Statistics Division of the 
Department of Animal Husbandry. 
2) See foot note no. 2 and 4. 
3) See Sub-section 22.2.3 and foot note no. 6. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) See Sub-section 22.2.4 and 22.2.5 
2) See foot note no. 8. 
3) Agricultural Statistics at a glance. 
4) RBI Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy 2005. 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) See Sub-section 22.3.1 
2) See foot note no. 18 
3) A system that enables the data uses to access specific data relating to ASI. 
4) Derivation of important technical ratios for using the principal 
characteristics of factory sector. 
5) Energy Statistics published by CSO. 
Check Your Progress 4 
1) Development commissioner for Small Scale Industries (DCSSI). 
2) Directorate of Industries of State Government and Union Territory 
Administrations. 
3) SIDBI, LIC, Handbook of statistics on the Indian Security Market. 


--- Page 63 ---
 
 
63
Trade and Finance 
UNIT 23 TRADE AND FINANCE 
Structure 
23.0 Objectives 
23.1 Introduction 
23.2 Trade 
 23.2.1 Merchandise Trade 
 23.2.2 Services Trade 
23.3 Finance 
 23.3.1 Public Finances 
 23.3.2 Currency, Coinage, Money and Banking 
 23.3.3 Financial Markets 
23.4 Let Us Sum Up 
23.5 Exercises 
23.6 Some Useful Books 
23.7 Answers or Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
23.0  OBJECTIVES 
After going through this Unit, you will be able to: 
• describe the kind of data available in India in the area of trade and finance; 
• state the various sources of data on trade and finance; 
• explain the reasons for divergence between merchandise trade 
deficit/surplus data provided by DGCI&S and RBI’s BOP data; and 
• discuss which agencies are involved in compilation of data on trade and 
finance. 
23.1  INTRODUCTION 
Trade is the means of building up an enduring relationship between countries 
and the means available to any country for accessing goods and services not 
available locally for various reasons like the lack of technical know-how. It is 
also the means of earning foreign exchange through exports so that such 
foreign exchange could be utilized to finance essential imports and to seek the 
much-needed technical know-how from outside the country for the 
development of industrial and technical infrastructure to strengthen its 
production capabilities. Trade pacts or agreements between countries or groups 
of countries constitute one way of developing and expanding trade, as these 
provide easier and tariff-free access to goods from member countries. While 
efforts towards such an objective will be of help in expanding our trade, 
globalization and the emergence of World Trade Organization (WTO) have 
only sharpened the need to ensure efficiency in the production of goods and 
services to compete in international markets to improve our share of world 
merchandise trade and trade in services. Trade is also closely tied up with our 
development objectives. Trade deficit or surplus, made up of deficit/surplus in 
merchandise trade and trade in services, contributes to current account deficit 
 


--- Page 64 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
64 
or surplus. Data on trade in merchandise and services would enable us to 
appreciate the trends and structure of trade and identify areas of strength and 
those with promise but need sustained attention. 
While trade and finance have been closely bound up with each other ever since 
the time money replaced barter as the means of exchange, finance is the lifeline 
of all activities – economic, social and administrative activities. It flows from 
the public as taxes to Government, as savings to banking and financial 
institutions and as share capital or bonds or debentures to the entrepreneur. It 
then gets used for a variety of developmental and non-developmental activities 
through Government and other agencies and flows back to members of the 
public as incomes in various ways, as factor incomes. It would therefore, be of 
interest to know how funds get mobilized for various purposes and get used. 
This Unit looks at the kind of data available that could enable us to analyse this 
mobilization process and the flows of funds to different areas of activity. Let us 
begin to discuss the data on trade. 
23.2  TRADE  
23.2.1 Merchandise Trade 
The Directorate General of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics 
(DGCI&S) collects and compiles statistics on imports and exports. It releases 
these data at regular intervals through their publications and through CDs. It 
prepares “Quick Estimates” on aggregate data of exports and imports and 
principal commodities within two weeks of the reference month and releases 
these in the monthly press release. It publishes 
1) A monthly brochure “Foreign Trade Statistics of India (Principal 
Commodities and Countries)” containing provisional data issued to meet 
the urgent needs of the Ministry of Commerce, other government 
organizations, Commodity Brands (CBs), Export Promotion Councils 
(EPCs) and research organizations. It contains commodity-wise, country-
wise and port-wise foreign trade information; 
2)  “Monthly Statistics of Foreign Trade of India, Volume I (Exports 
including re-exports) & Volume II (Imports) containing detailed data 
on foreign trade at the 8-digit level codes of the ITS (HTS) (see below); 
3) Quarterly publications :  
a) Statistics of the Foreign Trade of India by Countries – VolI 
(Exports including re-exports) and  
b) Statistics of the Foreign Trade of India by Countries – Vol II 
(Imports)  
4) Annual publications:  
a) Statistics of the Customs and Excise Revenue Collections of the 
Indian Union,  
b) Statistics of the Inland Coasting Trade Consignment of India, 
c) Inter-State Movements/ Flows of Goods by Rail, River and Air, 
d) Statistics of Foreign and coastal Cargo Movements of India, 
e) Selected Statistics of the Foreign Trade of India; 


--- Page 65 ---
 
 
65
Trade and Finance 5) The DGCI&S website (www.dgciskol.nic.in) has two parts, one consists 
of static pages and the dynamic pages. The first contains the history and 
the activities of DGCI&S and summary data on principal commodities, 
and countries and is updated regularly. The dynamic pages are mainly for 
on-line data dissemination and provide access on free and payment basis. 
This contains at least 24 months final foreign trade data at 8-digit 
commodity and principal commodity level and updated regularly; and 
6) The Priced Information Service System (PISS) provides information to 
private parties, EPCs, CBs, Foreign Embassies etc., on payment basis @ 
Re. 1 /- per unit record of information. It does not give the whole basket of 
8-digit commodity-country data for any particular period for reasons of 
‘copyright’ provision of the DGCI&S. It however, provides aggregate and 
detailed data to Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy (CMIE) , 
Mumbai for an efficient trade intelligence service. 
7) It also has a web-based data dissemination system for online data 
transaction through advance payment. The export and import trade data 
are available countrywise and economic regionwise. The detailed data on 
India’s foreign trade in merchandise are made available after completion 
of the third month from a particular month. Here the commodities referred 
to in these data stand for the ones specified in the ITC(HS) against 8-digit 
codes which have been developed by the DGCI&S by sub-dividing the 6-
digit codes of Harmonised System as internationally standardised. If you 
want to get data online, you can visit http://www.dgciskol.nic.in/new_ 
registration.asp and see the terms, conditions and procedures. 
The DGCI&S data are also presented as time series data in the Reserve Bank 
of India Handbook of Statistics on the Indian Economy. As mentioned 
above the CMIE is another source – their volume on Foreign Trade and 
BoP. The EPWRF (see its website – google search with EPWRF will enable 
you to access it) also publishes time series data on foreign trade – it is one of 
the 35 sets of special statistics on which it publishes long time series data along 
with information on conceptual and methodological issues. 
Foreign trade data published by DGCI&S relates to merchandise trade through 
all recognized seaports, airports, land customs stations and inland container 
depots located all over India. Data on exports include re-exports and relate to 
the free on board (f.o.b.) values and imports relate to cost, insurance and freight 
(C.I.F.) values. Exports and imports are based on a general system of 
recording. According to this, exports relate to Indian merchandise and re-
export relates to foreign merchandise previously imported into India. Imports 
relate to foreign merchandise, whether these are intended for consumption in 
India, bonding or re-exportation. 
The commodities comprising merchandise imports and exports are classified 
according to a standard classification. The trade classification in vogue in India 
between April, 1977 and March, 1987 was the Indian Trade Classification, 
Revision 2 (ITC – Rev. 2) – one that was based on the Standard International 
Trade Classification Revision 2 (SITC – Rev.2). A new system of commodity 
classification, known as Indian Trade Classification (based on the Harmonized 
Commodity Description and Coding System), or ITC(HS), has been adopted 
since April, 1987. ITC (HS) is an extended version of the International 
Classification System called “Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding 


--- Page 66 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
66 
System” evolved by the World Customs Organization, Brussels 1. These 
changes in the trade classification of commodities mean that time series data on 
export and import relating to some commodities may not be strictly 
comparable. Another element of non-comparability of time series data arises 
from changes in the definition of countries and/or groups. For example, data 
for Russia prior to 1993-94 relate to erstwhile USSR, with the exception of 
1992-93, the data for which relate to the Commonwealth of Independent States 
(CIS) representing a group of 15 countries 2. Similarly, Indian trade with 
Germany relates to Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) till 1989-90 and to the 
unified Germany thereafter. There are also changes in the membership of 
groups like the European Union, and Oil and Petroleum Exporting Countries 
(OPEC) from time to time. 
What would we like to know about foreign trade? The volume of trade, that is, 
the volume of exports and imports, the size of export earnings, the expenditure 
on imports, the size of exports relative to imports, earning from exports 
compared to expenses incurred on imports since exports earn foreign exchange 
while imports imply outflow of foreign exchange. We should like to know 
about the trends in these variables. Besides looking at the trends in the quantum 
and value of imports and exports, it is important to analyse the growth in 
foreign trade both in terms of value and volume, since both are subject to 
changes over time. Exports and imports are made up of a large number of 
commodities and fluctuations in the export and imports of individual 
commodities contribute to overall fluctuations in the volume and value of 
exports and imports. We, therefore, need a composite indicator of the  trends 
in trade. The index number of foreign trade of a country is a useful indicator of 
the temporal fluctuations in exports and imports of the country in the term of 
value, quantum and unit price and so on. Similarly, measures of the terms of 
trade could be derived from such indices relating to imports and exports. 
The index number of foreign trade is computed and presented as Unit Value 
Index (UVI) and Quantum Index (QI). These are defined as follows: 
 UVI = [ ∑ /g1842/g2869/g1843/g2930] / [∑ /g1842/g2868/g1843/g3047]   …………………………. (1) 
 
QI = [ ∑ /g1842/g2868/g1843/g2930] / [∑ /g1842/g2868/g1843/g2868]     …………………………. (2) 
w
here P1 Is the unit value of an item in the current period and Q t is the quantity 
of the same item in the current period, P 0 and Q 0 are the unit value and the 
quantity respectively of the same item during the base period and Σ is the 
summation over all commodities. These indices have been computed with 
1979-80 as the base year. 
Three types of Terms of Trade are computed from these ind ices: 
1) Gross Terms of Trade (GTT) = 100 × [(QI of imports)/QI of exports)] 
2) Net Terms of Trade (NTT) = 100 × [(UVI of exports)/(UVI of imports)] 
3) Income Terms of Trade (ITT) = [NTT × QI of exports]/100 
          = [UVI(exports)× QI(exports)]/ [UVI (imports)]. 
The existing index numbers have the base year 1979-80. Changes in the ITC 
since April, 1987 and the recasting of the basket of commodities to suit the new 
                                                             
1  This organization was previously known as Customs Cooperation Council. 
2  These were Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Estonia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz republic, 
Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan. 


--- Page 67 ---
 
 
67
Trade and Finance classification system, the base year 1979-80 has become too old to serve the 
purpose of temporal comparability and the new ITC adopted in April, 1987. 
The DGCI&S, therefore, decided to construct new index numbers with the 
base year 1998-99. It also decided to bring out global monthly indices and for 
selected countries. The preparation of these index numbers is in progress. 
What kinds of data are available on foreign trade? Time series on the following 
data are published in the RBI Handbook of Statistics of the Indian Economy 
2013-14, under the sub-heading “Trade and Balance of Payments”: 
a) India’s foreign trade (in US $ and Indian Rupees) from 1975-76 to 2013-14, 
The exports and imports have been shown as total and in two groups, 
namely, oil and non-oil. The “Trade Balance”, i.e., exports – imports is 
also given for each of these three groups. A negative figure meaning exports 
are less than imports. You can observe from this Table that India had a positive 
non-oil trade balance, albeit sporadically, till 2003-04. However, after that, 
trade balance for both oil and non-oil has become negative. 
b) Exports (in US$ and Indian Rupees) of principal commodities, from 1998-
99 to 2013-143; 
c) Imports (in US$ and Indian Rupees) of Principal Commodities 4, from 
1998-99 to 2013-14; 
d) Exports (in US$ and Indian Rupees) of selected commodities to principal 
countries; 
e) Direction of Foreign Trade (in US$ and Indian Rupees) showing exports 
and imports for each year by trade areas, groups of countries and 
countries; and within each group of countries or trade area, data are 
presented only for selected countries5; 
f) Year-wise indices, both UVI and QI, for imports and exports from 1976-
77 to 2007-08 (base 1978-79 = 100) and 1999-2000 to 2013-14 (base 
1999-2000 = 100) the three terms of trade measures; GTT, NTT and ITT; 
                                                            
 
3  Commodities were classified into 4 groups (including total), namely, primary products, 
manufactured goods, petroleum products and others; sub-divided further in into 11 sub-
groups and 44 items: A. Agriculture and allied Products (15 items), 2. Ores and Minerals (3 
items), 3. Leather and manufactures, 4. Chemicals and related products (4 items), 5. 
Engineering goods (6 items), 6. Textile and textile products (11 items), 7. Gems and jewelry, 
8. Handicrafts, excluding handmade carpet; 9. Other Manufactured Goods; 10. Petroleum 
products; and 11. Others. 
 
4  The classification of imports consisted of three broad groups, I Bulk Imports, II Non-bulk 
Imports and III Total Imports; Bulk Imports were further divided into three groups, namely, 
A. Petroleum, Crude and Products; B. Bulk Bulk Consumption Goods (consisting of 4 sub-
items); C. Other Bulk Items (9 sub-items); Non-bulk Import were A. Capital Goods (8 sub-
items), mainly export related items ( 4 sub-items) and Others (9 sub-items). 
 
5 
  The trade areas for which data are presented are: I OECD countries, II OPEC, III Eastern 
Europe, IV Developing Countries, V Others (Unspecified). Each of these trade areas is 
further divided into country-group and within each group figures are given only for some 
selected countries. Trade area I is divided into A. European Union (within which data for 6 
selected countries are given). B. North America (2 selected countries). C. Asia & Oceania (2 
selected countries) and D. Other OECD Countries (1 selected country). II and III have no 
further grouping of countries within them but figures for 6 selected countries under II and for 
2 selected countries under III are presented. Trade area IV is divided into A. Asia, B. Africa 
and C. Latin America Countries. A gets further grouped into (a) SAARC (figures for all 
countries are given under this), (b) Other Asian Developing Countries (figures for 6 selected 
countries are given). Figures for 7 selected countries under Africa are given and for Latin 
America no further break up by countries are given.  


--- Page 68 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
68 
g) Index numbers of Exports – QI and UVI for 9 commodity groups 6 from 
2005-06 onwards (base 1999-2000 = 100).  
h) Index numbers of Imports - QI and UVI for 9 commodity groups 7 from 
2005-06 onwards (base 1999-2000 = 100) Similar type of data on imports. 
i) India’s overall Balance of Payment (in US $ and Indian Rupees) under: A 
current account, B capital account, C. errors and omissions, D. overall 
balance and E. Monetary movements from 2008-09 onwards. 
j) Invisibles by category of transactions (in US $ and Indian Rupees) from 
1994-95 onwards. 
k) Exchange rate of Indian Rupee vis-à-vis US $, UK £, DM/ € and Japanese 
¥ from 1975 onwards (calendar year – annual average, financial year – 
annual average and end year rates). 
l) Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER) and Net Effective Exchange Rate 
(NEER) of Indian Rupee 36-country bilateral weights) with base 2004-05 
from calendar year 2005 onwards. 
m) Indices of REER and NEER. 
n) External assistance in the form of loans and grants from 1985-86 onwards 
(in US $ and Indian Rupees), authorization, utilization and debt service 
payments. 
o) NRI deposits outstanding (in US $ and Indian Rupees) from 1996 onwards 
in different types of accounts like NR (E)RA, FCNR(A), FCNR(B), 
NR(NR)RD, NRO, FC (B&O)D, FC(O)N and total. It has increased from 
US $17.446 billion in 1996 to US $103.844 in 2014. 
p) Foreign investment inflows (in US $ and Indian Rupees) namely, gross 
investments, repatriation/ disinvestment, FDI by India, net foreign direct 
investment, net portfolio investment from 2000-01 onwards. 
q) Foreign exchange reserves (in US$ and Indian Rupees) from 1956-57 onwards. 
r) India’s external debt (in US $ and Indian Rupees) from 1996 onwards 8, 
which, inter alia, providesconcessional debt as percentage of total debt, 
short term debt as % to total debt, debt stock-GDP ratio (%) and debt 
service ratio (%). 
 
                                                            
 
6  The commodity groups are: I Food and live animals (6 sub-groups), II. Beverages and 
Tobacco, III. Crude materials, inedible, except fuel (4 sub-groups), IV. Mineral fuels, 
lubricants and related materials (3 sub-groups), V. Animal and vegetable oil, fats and 
waxes, VI. Chemicals and related products (6 sub-groups), VII. Manufactured goods 
classified chiefly by material (5 sub-groups), VIII. Machinery and transport equipment (9 
sub-groups) and IX. Misc. manufactured articles (4 sub-groups). In a few cases, indices for 
specific commodities under a sub-group are also given. 
7  The commodity groups are: I Food and live animals (5 sub-groups), II. Beverages and 
Tobacco (2 sub-groups), III. Crude materials, inedible, except fuel (7 sub-groups), IV. 
Mineral fuels, lubricants and related materials (3 sub-groups), V. Animal and vegetable oil, 
fats and waxes, VI. Chemicals and related products (8 sub-groups), VII. Manufactured 
goods classified chiefly by material (7 sub-groups), VIII. Machinery and transport 
equipment (9 sub-groups) and IX. Misc. manufactured articles (3 sub-groups). In a few 
cases, indices for specific commodities under a sub-group are also given. 
8  The debts are classified into I. Multilateral, II. Bilateral, III. International Monetary Fund, 
IV. Trade credit, V. Commercial borrowing, VI. NRI & FC (B&O) deposits, VII. Rupee 
debt, VIII. Total long-term debt, IX. Short-term debt and X. Gross total debt. Most of the 
groups have sub-groups A. Government borrowing, and B. Non-Government borrowing, 
further disaggregated into concessional and non-concessional borrowing. 


--- Page 69 ---
 
 
69
Trade and Finance Some of these data are from the DGCI&S and the rest are from the Balance of 
Payments (BoP) data of the RBI. The BoP data reported by RBI show the 
value of merchandise imports on the debit side and that of exports on the credit 
side. It also shows trade balance – a trade deficit or a trade surplus – depending 
upon whether the difference ‘export - imports’ is negative or positive. These 
are all shown in the balance payment format as part of current account, which 
also shows another entity ‘invisibles’. However, there is a divergence in trade 
deficit/surplus in merchandise trade shown by DGCI&S data and that shown 
by RBI’s BoP data. This discrepancy between the two sources also affects 
data on current account deficit (CAD) or surplus (CDS), since current account 
deficit/surplus is the total of trade deficit/surplus and net invisibles (inflow of 
invisibles net of outflow in the category ‘invisibles’ 9) For example, the 
Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister noted, in its Report on 
Balance of Payments (BoP) submitted to the Prime Minister recently, that the 
divergence between the two sources of data on trade was growing 10. It noted 
that trade deficit is projected for the year 2005-06 at 5.2 per cent of GDP on the 
basis of trade data from DGCI&S, while it is 7.7 per cent according to RBI’s 
BoP data – a difference of the size of 2.5 per cent of GDP. CAD based on trade 
data of DGCI&S is only 0.3 per cent of GDP while it is 2.9 per cent of GDP if 
the estimate of CAD is based on trade data from BoP. The reasons for the 
divergence in the data between the two sources are, as noted by the Council: 
• DGCI&S tracks physical imports and exports while BoP data tracks 
payment transactions relating to merchandise trade; 
• DGCI&S data do not capture Government imports, which are exempted 
from customs duty. Defence imports fall into this category; and 
• DGCI&S data do not capture imports that do not cross customs boundary 
(for example, oil rigs and some aircrafts) while they are still paid for and 
get captured in BoP data. 
23.2.2 Services Trade 
Besides export and import of merchandise, a number of services, like 
transportation services, travel services, software, Information technology-
Enabled Services (ITES), business services and professional services are 
exported and imported. These are captured by “non-factor services” included in 
the entry “Invisibles” in the Tables on India’s Overall BoP and on Key 
Components of India’s BoP in the RBI Handbook . The handbook has also a 
table (Table 140 in RBI’s Handbook of 2013-14) that gives the distribution of 
‘invisibles’ by transactions – credit, debit and net, under the Current Account, 
giving separately for a) Services: Travel, Transportation, Insurance, G.n.i.e, 
Miscellaneous (software services, business services, financial services and 
communication services); b) Transfers: Official, Private; c) Income: investment 
income, compensation of employees. 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) What kind of Trade Data is compiled by DGCI&S? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
                                                            
 
9 See under the section on Finance later in this Unit. 
10 News report in the Hindu dated February, 23, 2006 Chennai edition – Business page. 
