--- Page 92 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
92 
k) UPS/UPSS/CWS/CDS unemployment rates (can be easily estimated from 
the tables on distribution of 1000 persons by various characteristics, as 
indicated in the main paragraph) for all groups together and for different 
groups like gender, age group, educational level, MPCE classes, 
household type, household land cultivated class and principal household 
economic activity, etc.; 
l) Average daily salary/wage earnings of regular wage/salaried employees 
aged 15-59 by sex, sector of work and education; a similar distribution by 
occupational groups and education; and 
m) Average daily wage/earnings per day received by casual labour by sex, age 
group, type of operation, and sub-round15. 
Data on employment are thus available from several sources. Estimates of 
employment derived from different sources for the same sector or sub-sector 
will differ. While this may be frustrating to a lay person, it opens up an exciting 
and challenging opportunity to an analyst to unravel the factors responsible for 
such variations and to find ways and means of tackling such factors. Such 
factors could be differences in the concepts, definitions and mode of collection 
of data (sample survey, census or administrative/statutory reporting systems) 
used by the different sources. There may be other factors causing the 
divergence in estimates. Some steps could be taken to remove at least a few of 
these factors. Data collecting agencies should adopt the same concepts and 
definitions for enquiries on the same or similar subjects, as far as possible. The 
use of trained personnel in data collection does have a favourable impact on the 
quality of data and should receive consideration. Estimates based on sample 
surveys should accompanied by estimates of the standard error to which the 
estimates from the survey are subject16. 
24.2.2 Quality/Adequacy of Employment 
NSSO survey data (items above) can be used to analyse the quality and 
adequacy of employment. Besides underemployment among the employed, other 
aspects of quality can also be looked at. One is the proportion of the employed by 
employment status, especially the proportion of the work force in ‘casual 
employment’. The second is a comparison of the average daily earnings of male and 
female, regular and casual workers in different sectors and operations with the 
prevailing statutory minimum wage and the poverty line. The third is a look at the 
pattern of employment status of the workers belonging to poor households. These 
will throw light on the quality of employment enjoyed by the workforce, quality in 
terms of the intermittent nature of work, tenure of employment, employment 
security and low wages and above all, the prevailing gender differences in these 
aspects of quality. Gender differences in access to employment in different 
occupations and sectors of economic activity would be clear from a perusal of the 
tables listed in the preceding section. Even aspects of the question of the 
invisibility of the female worker, leading to underestimation of the female 
workforce can be examined17. 
                                                            
 
15  One year long round of the Survey has four sub-rounds to take note of the seasonal effect 
on the variables under investigation. 
16  Reports on NSSO surveys do provide information on the concepts, definitions, coverage, 
sampling design and estimation procedures adopted and the standard errors of estimates 
presented in the reports.  
17  NSSO Report No. 554 referred to in an earlier footnote. See also “Gender and 
Employment in India”, T.S. Papola & Alakh N. Sharma (Ed), published by Indian 
Society of Labour Economics and Institute of Economics Growth in association with 
Vikas Publishing House Ltd, New Delhi. (1999). 


--- Page 93 ---
 
 
93
Social SectorThe Labour Bureau, Shimla under the Ministry of Labour also publishes 18 data 
on wage levels in the organized sector and on the welfare of labour. Data on 
total earnings of factory workers are collected through the statutory returns 
under the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 from establishments defined as 
factories under the Factories Act, 1948. The Act was applicable to employees 
with earnings19 up to Rs. 200. This limit has been increased from time to time 
to 1600 in 1982. These returns are, however, not received from all factories. 
The Bureau also conducts Occupational Wage Surveys in selected industries at 
regular intervals (called first round, second round and so on) and publishes 
reports20 on these surveys) that provide the distribution of workers by levels of 
earnings and by occupations for each industry. These reports facilitate analysis 
of variation in levels of earnings within occupations, across gender within 
occupations, across regions and industries and to judge the adequacy of such 
employment opportunities in the light of statutory minimum wages and the 
poverty line. We have seen in the Unit on Agricultural and Industrial Data that 
the ASI gives information on the total wages, total emoluments and employee 
compensation along with mandays of workers and mandays of employees in 
different industries in the factory sector. These thus help in deriving the 
average wage per worker-manday and the average emoluments per employee-
manday and the average employee compensation per employee-manday. 
As for the unregistered sector and the unorganized part of other sectors, the 
DE, NDE and OAE Surveys 21 and other Establishment Surveys of the 
CSO in different sectors (till the early 1990s) and the unorganized sector 
surveys of the NSSO 22provide data on average annual earnings for men, 
women and children in such establishments. Regular reports like “Wage 
Rates in Rural India” (the latest published relates to 2004-05) and the Report 
on the Working of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (the latest is for 2003), of 
Labour Bureau enable an analysis of rural/unorganized sector wage levels vis-
à-vis statutory minimum wages and poverty line. 
The prevalence of child labour, which depicts an exploitative dimension of the 
economic system, can be seen from the Census and NSSO tables on the 
distribution of the work force by age groups and activity, the former down to 
the district level and the latter up to the State level (technically down to NSS 
regions due to availability of the unit record data on floppies/CDs). Such data 
may not fully reflect the ground level realities because surveys may not be able 
to extract information on employment of children, for various reasons. Further, 
such data are also dated. These can help only in drawing attention to the areas 
where child labour is prevalent so that the authorities concerned can initiate 
further action. It is usually the Non-Government Organisations (NGOs) active 
in the field of the rights of children that succeed in locating establishments 
employing children and press the Government to take further action. 
                                                            
 
18 Yearbooks of Labour Statistics, (various years), Ministry of Labour, Shimla. 
19 Earnings include basic wages, dearness allowance, money value of concessions, annual or 
prepaid bonus, and arrears. 
20Reports on Occupational Wage Surveys (Successive Rounds – the latest publications relate 
to the sixth round), Ministry of Labour, Labour Bureau, Shimla. 
21Directory Establishments, Non Directory Establishments and Own Account Enterprises. The 
first two employ at least one hired worker and a total of 6 or more persons and 1 to 5 persons 
respectively. In Own Account Enterprises, no hired worker works on a regular basis. These 
surveys are now being conducted by the NSSO. The of NSS Report 549, for the year 2010-
11 is the latest report on unorganized non agricultural enterprises (excluding construction), 
which provide data on DE, NDE and OAE. 
22Besides the reports listed in Sub-section 21.3.4 of unit 21.  


--- Page 94 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
94 
24.2.3 Labour Welfare 
The Labour Bureau publishes23 data on several aspects of labour welfare – data 
on industrial injuries, injuries in mines, compensation to workers for injuries 
and death, industrial disputes, health insurance, provident fund and trade 
unions of employers and workers. Statistics on industrial injuries are collected 
through statutory returns under the Factories Act, 1948 that provides that 
industrial accidents due to which the affected persons are prevented from 
attending to work for at least 48 hours should be reported to the inspector of 
factories. These depend on returns, and the sizeable non-response in the 
submission of these mars the quality of this source of data on incidence of fatal 
and non-fatal injuries in factories in mines under the Mines Act, 1952, as 
amended in 1983. Initially, data on the number of serious accidents and the 
accident rate were classified as ‘fatal’ and ‘serious’. Subsequently, from 1984, 
accidents and the accident rate (accidents per 100 employees) were classified 
as ‘fatal’ ‘spot serious’ 24 and ‘reportable serious’ 25. Complete statistics are not 
available for the same reasons mentioned earlier. Statistics on ‘compensated 
injuries’ and the amount of compensation paid, both classified as (resulting in) 
‘death’ and (leading to) ‘disability’ – ‘permanent’ and ‘temporary’, are 
collected under the Workmen’s Compensation (WC) Act, 1923 on the basis of 
annual returns received from the State Governments, Posts & Telegraph 
Departments and the Railway Board for different Zonal Railways under the 
Act. Compensation is payable to workers employed in ‘scheduled 
employments’26 for injuries due to accidents resulting in death or disablement 
for more than three days, provided that it is not caused through the fault of the 
worker himself. The number of injuries reported in the returns does not reflect 
the total number of injuries that occur, as all the injuries are not compensated 
for. Further, many of the establishments covered by the Act fail to submit 
returns and, therefore, the information received by the State Governments 
about the compensated injuries and the amount of compensation paid is 
incomplete. Compensation for injuries in establishments covered by the 
Employees State Insurance (ESI) Act, 1948 are paid under the ESI Act and not 
under WC Act. These limitations affect the trends and comparability over time 
of compensated accidents. 
Statistics on the number of (a) industrial disputes 27, (b) workers involved in the 
disputes, (c) mandays lost and (d) causes of disputes – (i) wages and 
allowances, (ii) bonus, (iii) personnel matters, (iv) retrenchment, (v) leave and 
hours of work/shift working, (vi) indiscipline and violence, (vii) others, and 
(viii) cause not known. Completeness of these data would depend on the extent 
to which outside authorities are involved in the resolution of the disputes. How 
are the workers and the employers, the two pillars of industrial progress, 
organized to fight for their rights? The Trade Unions Act, 1926 regulates the 
formation and functioning of such organizations. The annual returns under the 
                                                            
 
23  Yearbooks of Labour Statistics referred to in an earlier footnote. 
24  This is one where one or more persons have received serious bodily injury. This means any 
injury which involves, or in all probability will involve, (a) the permanent loss of any part 
or section of the body or use of any part or section of the body or (b) the permanent loss of, 
or injury to, sight or hearing or (c) any permanent incapacity or (d) the fracture of any bone 
or one or more joints or bones of any phalanges of hand or foot. 
25  This is one where one or more persons have received “reportable injury”. This means any 
injury other than a serious bodily injury, which involves, or in all probability will involve, 
the enforced absence of the injured person from work for a period of 72 hours or more. 
26  Employments specified in the Schedule appended to the Act under reference. 
27 Disputes resulting in work-stoppages involving 10 or more workers. 


--- Page 95 ---
 
 
95
Social SectorAct received from the State Governments relate only to those organizations that 
have been registered with the State Governments under the Act. And it is not 
obligatory on these organizations to secure registration under the Act. The 
response rate even among the registered ones is less than 50 per cent. The data 
provided in the Yearbooks of Labour Statistics relates to the number of (i) 
workers’ organizations on the register (ii) those submitting returns, (iii) 
percentage response, (iv) membership at the end of the year, (v) income 
including balance carried over from the previous year, (vi) expenditure, and 
(vii) balance of funds at the close of the year and similar data for employers’ 
organizations. Information on the membership of the employers’ and workers’ 
organizations by NIC 1987 is available in the Yearbooks. Statistics relating to 
the working of various welfare funds like the Coal, Mica etc., Mines Welfare 
Funds and the ESI Corporation and the Employees Provident Fund 
Organisation (EPFO) – number of beneficiaries/members, etc., - are also 
provided by Yearbooks and the annual reports of the ESIC and EPFO28. 
As for the unorganized sector, the Labour Bureau’s reports on their ongoing 
programme of surveys on (i) the working and living conditions of Scheduled 
Caste/Tribe workers, (ii) living conditions of unorganized workers, and (iii) 
contract labour provide information on the qualitative aspects of employment 
in terms of variables like wage levels, working and living conditions, work 
place safety and amenities at the work place of these classes of unorganized 
workers in rural and urban areas. 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) Name the sources that provide data on employment. 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
2) Explain the kind of data on employment and unemployment available 
from the population census 2001. 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
3) State the different measures of employment/unemployment/labour force 
used by NSSO in different quinquennial surveys. 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
                                                            
 
28 See also the Section on Health in this Unit. 


--- Page 96 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
96 
4) Identify the different aspects of labour welfare on which data are compiled 
by the Labour Bureau. 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
24.3  EDUCATION 
Education is an important instrument for empowering people, especially 
women. Education nurtures and develops their innate talents and capabilities 
and enables them to contribute effectively to the development process and reap 
its benefits. It is also an effective instrument for reducing social and economic 
inequalities. We have built up over the years a vast educational system in an 
attempt to provide education for all, to ensure that the skill and expertise needs 
of a developing economy are met satisfactorily and at the same time, to 
monitor the functioning of the educational system as an effective instrument for 
tackling inequalities. We would, therefore, like to look at data on different 
aspects of the educational and training system such as its size and structure, the 
physical inputs available to it for its effective functioning, its geographical 
spread, the type of skills and expertise it seek to generate, the access of 
different sections of society and areas of the country to it and the progress 
made towards the goals like ‘total literacy’, ‘universalisation of secondary 
education’, ‘education for all’ and ‘removal of inequalities’. 
The United Nations, in the year 2000, has put achieving of universal primary 
education as one of the eight Millennium Development Goals, to be achieved 
by 2015. Education plays an important role in shaping the post 2015 
development agenda as well. The Government of India has enacted the Right to 
Education Act in August 2009. Therefore, the importance of research on the 
progress of the nation towards achieving these goals and its effects on the other 
social and economic goals is increasing by day.  
The Department of School Education and the Department of Higher Education 
of the Ministry of Human Resources Development (MHRD), the National 
University of Educational Planning and Administration (NUEPA), National 
Council for Educational Research and Training (NCERT) and the University 
Grants Commission (UGC) collect and publish educational statistics, conduct 
research studies and surveys in the area of education. The International 
Standard Classification of Education (ISCED) is used worldwide to compile 
and compare cross-country statistics of education. In 2014, for the first time, 
the MHRD has developed the Indian Standard Classification of Education 
(InSCED), as a part of collection, dissemination and presentation of statistical 
data on education. Educational activities have been first classified into 16 
broad levels from A through O and X. Levels A to E pertain to School 
Education, levels F to L pertains to Higher Education, levels M, N and O 
pertain to Certificate Courses, In-service training and Adult Education. The 
detailed structure can be accessed at http://mhrd.gov.in/sites/upload_files/ 
mhrd/files/statistics/InSCED2014_0.pdf.  


--- Page 97 ---
 
 
97
Social SectorThe annual publication “Educational Statistics at a Glance” provide a host of 
information on school education, like number of educational institutions, level 
and Stage-wise enrollment in school and higher education, teacher-student 
ratio, drop-out rates, examination results, public expenditure on education, etc. 
The MHRD also publishes a compendium on Universities in India, providing 
University-wise data on student enrollment, number of teachers, staff quarters, 
hostels, etc. The Annual Report of the MHRD also provides information on 
school and higher education in India. All these reports can be accessed free of 
charge at the website www.mhrd.gov.in in the sections documents and reports 
and the section statistics. 
The NUEPA has developed a  District Information System of Education 
(DISE, can be accessed at www.dise.in ) to record data from the schools and 
junior colleges in all districts of India. Analytical reports based on this data, 
like school and facility related indicators, enrollment based indicators, teacher 
related indicators and EDI and analytical tables can be accessed at 
http://www.dise.in/AR.htm. These reports are available from the period 200-02 
onwards, although the time series varies among topics. Provisional results of 
the “Report of the eighth AIES”, (http://www.aises.nic.in/surveyoutputs) 
published by the NCERT, for the year 2009, in spite of being a bit dated, 
provides important data on school education statistics. While the data in the 
publication of MHRD are based on returns from the State Governments and 
Union Territory Administrations, the last one is based on a field survey. The 
University Grants Commission and MHRD provide data on university level 
courses in professional and technical courses. The MHRD has set up a 
National Technical Manpower Information System (NTMIS) – 
(seehttp://www.iamrindia.gov.in/_aboutNTMIS.htm) with lead centre at the 
Institute of Applied Manpower Research (IAMR), New Delhi and 21 nodal 
centres located at different States. It provides data on technical manpower – 
intake in and output from institutions and the utilization patterns of such output 
in detail through Tracer Studies 29 and other studies. These are disseminated 
through reports released from time to time by IAMR. The Employment-
Unemployment surveys of the NSSO and Education surveys conducted in 
the 52 nd (1995-96), 64 th (2007-08) and 71 st (2014) Round of NSSO and the 
social and cultural tables of the population Census (ORGI) also provide 
useful data on literacy and educational composition of the population or stocks 
of educated manpower of different levels of education and their utilization 
patterns – snapshots, at specific points of time, of the impact of the efforts in 
the area of education. 
The kind of data available in these publications and sources are indicated below: 
24.3.1 Educational Infrastructure 
a) Levels of literacy and progress of efforts under literacy campaigns; (MHRD) 
b) The number of institutions – colleges (including universities, deemed 
universities and institutions of national importance) and all types of 
general, technical and professional schools; (MHRD & UGC) 
                                                            
 
29 Tracer Studies are, as the name suggests, trace or follow up specific cohorts or batches of 
students passing out of institutions to find out their present activity status. This helps in 
evaluating the trends over time in (a) the capacity of the economy to absorb the specific 
category of manpower in employment, (b) the waiting time for employment for the category 
of manpower, and (c) market value, in terms of salary levels in first employment, of the 
manpower category. These surveys are also called Cohort Studies. 


--- Page 98 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
98 
c) The number of universities, deemed universities and institutions of 
national importance, the distribution of number of colleges by categories 
like those teaching arts, science & commerce, oriental learning and 
different categories of professional subjects like law, agriculture, 
engineering & technology and medicine and the distribution of schools in 
the area of general education (and stages like pre-primary and primary 
etc.,) and different categories such as those dealing with vocational, 
professional, special education etc. (MHRD & UGC); 
d) Teacher (male and female and those belonging to SC/SCcommunities), the 
proportion trained among the, terms and conditions of their employment 
and attrition of the stock of teachers by cause. (AIES); 
e) Patterns of management of colleges including professional colleges and 
deemed universities, recognition by appropriate bodies, availability of 
teachers and facilities like laboratory and equipment etc. (UGC); 
f) Patterns of management (Government, local bodies, private management, 
religious and linguistic minority trusts/organizations and so on), medium 
of instruction, type of school buildings ( pucca, kutcha, thatched hut etc.,), 
crowding (number of rooms in the building and the number used for 
instructional purposes), availability and adequacy of facilities like drinking 
water, labatories and urinals (and whether these are available separately 
for girls). (Sixth AIES); 
g) Teachers in professional and technical institutions and the number of 
technical teacher training institutions. (MHRD & UGC); 
h) The number of Industrial Training Institutions (ITIs) and Advanced 
Training Institutes, and the training capacity for apprenticeship training in 
industry under the Apprenticeship Act, 1961 for those passing out of ITIs 
and the vocational stream of schools. (MoLE and MHRD); 
i) The number of institutions for training instructors for it is. (MoLE)30; 
j) The number of Vocational Rehabilitation Centres (VRCs) for the 
Physically Handicapped 31 set up by the DGE&T all over the country for 
giving adjustment training and placement in suitable employment through 
the Special Employment Exchanges for this group of people. (DGE&T32); 
k) Expenditure on education by programmes like the Sarva Siksha Abhiyan, 
the Total Literacy Campaign and Adult Education; direct and indirect 
expenditure on recognized institutions of education. (MHRD). 
24.3.2 Infrastructure Utilisation and Access to Educational 
Opportunities 
a) Literacy rates – overall and age-specific, among SC/ST and adults; 
(Census – Social & Cultural Tables; NSSO & MHRD); 
b) The number of students and the number of female students in the 
institutions specified in item ‘b’ above; 
                                                            
 
30 Annual Reports of the Ministry of Labour, the part relating to DGE&T. 
31 The phrase “physically challenged” instead of the phrase “physically handicapped” is being 
brought into use nowadays in public discussions on the subject. 
32 See the preceding footnote. 


--- Page 99 ---
 
 
99
Social Sectorc) The number of students and the number of girl students by courses and 
stages of education in recognized institutions – from the nursery class to 
the high/higher secondary level and in schools for vocational & 
professional education and special education and similar data for rural 
areas. (MHRD); 
d) The number of male and female workers and marginal workers in the age 
group 5-9 and 10-14 – working children; (Census and NSSO); a 
comparison of this with the population in these age groups and data on 
school enrolment would lead to an assessment of the number of children 
who are neither in school nor in the workforce; 
e) Enrolment and output in institutions specified in items ‘h’, ‘I’ and ‘j’ 
above; 
f) Enrolment (and enrolment of female students) in university level general 
education courses by stages (degree, post graduate degree, 
diploma/certificate, research) and university level professional and 
technical education courses by faculty. (MHRD & UGC); 
g) Similar information of the kind mentioned above for Scheduled Castes and 
Tribes (SC/ST) and females belonging to such sections of society. (MHRD 
& UGC); 
h) Teacher-Pupil ratios at different levels of education. (MHRD); 
i) Intake and output of graduates and post graduates in different disciplines 
and faculties. (MHRD & UGC); 
j) Coverage of population in appropriate age groups by different stages of 
education. (MHRD); 
k) Dropout rates at different stages of education. (MHRD); 
l) Distribution of population attending educational institution by age, sex and 
type of educational institution for general and SC/ST population; 
m) Access of the general and SC/ST population to (or availability of) facilities 
for different levels of education in rural habitations and urban settlements 
belonging to different population slabs, in terms of distance of the 
habitation from the facility; similar information regarding non-formal 
education (NFE) centers. (Sixth AIES); 
n) Availability of special institutions suited to different types of disability of 
children in different villages and towns and the enrolment of disabled 
children in such institutions. (Sixth AIES); 
o) Utilization patterns of different categories of professional and technical 
manpower in general and trends in waiting time for employment, 
utilization patterns and bargaining power for employees’ compensation 
(salary etc.,) through tracer studies. (IAMR); 
p) The disabled among main workers, marginal workers and non-workers by 
type of disability, age and sex. (Census); 
q) Stocks of educated manpower and also selected categories of technical 
manpower for the general population, SC/ST and by religious communities; 


--- Page 100 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
100 
r) The distribution of population by different levels of educational attainment 
(including illiterates, literates without any educational attainment) for 
population groups like SC/ST/Backward Classes (BC)/general households 
and those belonging to different religions, household types like (a) those 
with different sizes of land holdings; (b) households self-employed in 
agriculture, households self-employed outside agriculture, agricultural 
labour households, other labour households and households depending 
largely on regular wage/salaried employment outside agriculture; and (c) 
households belonging to different monthly per capita consumption 
expenditure (MPCE) classes. (NSSO and Census)33. 
One should not forget to mention in this context the National Human 
Development Reports (NHDR) prepared by the Planning Commission (now 
rechristened as NitiAyog) and the HDRs prepared by different State 
Governments as very useful sources for the manner in which available data on 
education, health, and other areas have been utilized to compute human 
development indicators and also as important sources for basic data on these 
sectors. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) Name the organizations/institutions that collect and publish the data on 
different aspects of education. 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
2) What do you understand by the term ‘Tracer Studies’? How are these 
useful? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
3) Prepare a chart stating the kind of educational data available in the various 
documents published by MHRD and UGC. 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
                                                            
 
33 See also the sub-section (b) on education in the Section on ‘Level of Inequality on Non-
income Aspects of Life in Unit 4 on Poverty & Inequality: Policy Implications in Block 1 of 
MEC – 005 on Indian Economic Policy in your first year course. 
