--- Page 9 ---
 
 
9
Macro-Variable Data: 
National Income, Saving 
and InvestmentUNIT 21 MACRO-VARIABLE DATA: 
NATIONAL INCOME SAVING  
AND INVESTMENT 
Structure 
21.0 Objectives    
21.1 Introduction 
21.2 The Indian Statistical System 
21.3 National Income and Related Macro Economic Aggregates 
21.3.1 System of National Accounts (SNA) 
21.3.2 Estimates of National Income and Related Macroeconomic Aggregates 
21.3.3 The Input-Output Table 
21.3.4 Regional  Accounts – Estimates of State Income and Related Aggregates 
21.3.5 Regional Accounts – Estimates of District Income 
21.3.6 National Income and Levels of Living 
21.4 Saving 
21.5 Investment 
21.6 Let Us Sum Up 
21.7 Exercises 
21.8 Some Useful Books 
21.9 Answers or Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
21.0  OBJECTIVES 
After going through this Unit, you will be able to: 
• know the various approaches followed by the Indian statistical system in 
generating data on various economic and social phenomena; 
• explain the SNA (System of National Accounts) methodology of data 
compilation; 
• identify the various aggregates on which estimates are made by the 
National Accounts System; 
• compare the interrelationship among different sectors of the economy 
through input-output transaction table (I-OTT) compiled by CSO; and  
• describe the data on National Income, Saving, Investment and other 
related macro economic variable and the estimates of the state income 
which enable analysis of various aspects of economy. 
21.1  INTRODUCTION 
You would soon be a professional economist and would possibly be engaged in 
research or would function as an economic analyst or adviser in a Government 
or non-Government organization. As a professional economist, you will have 
to analyse situations and arrive at conclusions about them or develop solutions 
 


--- Page 10 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
10 
National Income, Saving 
for further action to tackle such situations.  You will, for this purpose, identify 
the variables that, in your opinion, shape or affect the problem at hand, 
incorporate these in a suitably chosen model, test the efficacy of the model in 
reflecting the situation under examination and proceed further with the 
analysis.  A basic input for such activity is data on the variables incorporated in 
the model.  The availability of data relevant to the proposed analysis enhances 
or restricts the scope of your analysis and the reliability of the conclusions 
arrived at on the basis of the analysis.  Indeed, it might even restrict the kind of 
variables and model you would like to use in your analysis, unless you want to 
conduct a survey yourself to collect the data that are not available. Your 
technical and professional equipment as an economist is, therefore, incomplete 
without knowledge of where data on the variables in question are available and 
how good they are for the purpose of the analysis at hand.  This knowledge 
should naturally cover the entire data base of the Indian economy since an 
economist’s work can cover any part or the whole of the Indian economy. 
We shall look at the data base of the Indian economy in this Block. This Unit 
deals with data available on National Income, Saving and Investment – the 
major macro variables relating to the economy and associated macroeconomic 
aggregates.  Agricultural and Industrial data, data relating to the Social Sector, 
Trade and Finance will be discussed in the subsequent units of this block. 
Let us begin by taking a look at the Indian statistical system. 
21.2  THE INDIAN STATISTICAL SYSTEM 
The Indian Statistical System generates data on a variety of economic and 
social phenomena, essentially through six approaches. First, Central Acts like 
the Census Act, 1948; and the Collection of Statistics Act, 2008, etc. enable the 
Government agencies to conduct large-scale sample surveys for collection of 
data at regular intervals. Second, statutory returns prescribed under several 
other Acts like the Factories Act, 1948 the Companies Act, 1956, the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1953; the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 and 
the implementation of these Acts generate data on matters not covered by the 
surveys. Third, data collected by individual Ministries, Departments and 
organizations of the Central and State Governments as part of their specific 
functions reflect the emerging situation in different sectors and sub-sectors of 
the economy and administrative divisions of the country. Fourth, the 
administrative reports of these organizations supplement such data.  Next, 
information derived from the data flows mentioned above, like the National 
Accounts Statistics (NAS) , index numbers of prices and production and 
indices like the Human Development Index and Gender Development Index 
provide readily usable inputs for research and policy and evaluation of the 
impact of policies and programmes of development in terms of the health of the 
economy and the well-being of the society.  Lastly, a large number of surveys 
and research studies conducted by various institutions, public and private, on a 
variety of subjects constitute another flow of data and information. 
The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation of the Government 
of India is the apex body in the official statistical system of the country.  The 
Ministry is headed by the Chief Statistician of the country. The Ministry 
consists of the Central Statistics Office (CSO), the National Sample Survey 
Office (NSSO) and the Computer Centre (CC).  The Directorates of Economics 
and Statistics function at the level of the State/UT Governments. The CSO 


--- Page 11 ---
 
 
11
Macro-Variable Data: 
National Income, Saving 
and Investment
coordinates the statistical activities in the country, lays down and maintains 
statistical norms and standards and provides liaison with Central, State and 
International statistical agencies. There is also a National Statistical Commission 
(NSC), comprising of Chairman and Members, who are eminent economists 
and statisticians from research institutions, representatives of Central Ministries 
and Departments and the State Directorates of Economics and Statistics, to 
provide (i) guidance for an overall perspective for statistical development in the 
country, (ii) guidance to Government on policy issues, and (iii) ensure effective 
coordination of all statistical activities of the Government of India. CSO is the 
Secretariat of the NSC. 
The CSO, as the Central Statistical Authority, is responsible for coordination of 
statistical activities in the country and for evolving and maintaining statistical 
standards. Mention should be made in this connection of three publications of 
CSO, namely, the Sources and Methods of National Accounts Statistics, the 
National Industrial Classification and the Consumer Price Index. The first two 
are adhoc while the third a monthly one. The first one covers the methods and 
classification principles to be followed for preparation of the macro economic 
aggregates, the second one gives the classification principle to be followed for 
national and international comparability and the third one provides State/UT 
wise price indices. 
Certain other agencies concerned with economic development also bring out 
publications that cover data relating to most of all the sectors of the economy at 
one place.  These are the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Bulletin (monthly), 
the Financial Stability Report (including Trend and Progress of Banking 
in India), RBI’s Handbook of Statistics on the Indian Economy and the 
website of the RBI, the pre-Budget Economic Survey and the Budget presented 
to Parliament  by the Finance Minister every year. The Five-Year Plan 
documents of the Planning Commission of the Government of India used to 
make up yet another set of data sources that provides important data across 
sectors. The Human Development Report was prepared by the Planning 
Commission for the first time in the year 2001. This and similar reports 
prepared subsequently by many of the State Governments for individual 
States and for district constituted another set of sources for data across sectors 
at the national, State, district and even sub-district levels.  The District Census 
Handbooks published after successive population censuses by the Office of 
the Registrar General of India (ORGI) and the Directorates of Census of 
different States and Union Territories provide comprehensive information 
across sectors on individual districts, sub-districts, towns and villages. The 
ORGI, in the year 2014 has also launched a digital library of all census tables 
published since Census 1991 in their website www.censusindia.gov.in. These 
tables together provide a very useful time series data on demographic 
characteristics of the country and its States/ UTs. Most of the data and reports 
published by Government agencies are available in electronic format, that is, in 
DVDs/CDs and are accessible at the websites of the agencies concerned. In the 
year 2013, the Planning Commission has also set up a central web-based 
repository, namely, www.data.gov.in to bring published data of different 
Government agencies under one roof. 
The Indian statistical system has also recently been reviewed so as to bring 
about improvements in it. A National Statistical Commission was appointed by 
the Government of India to examine critically the deficiencies of the existing 
statistical system from the point of view of timely availability, reliability and 
adequacy of data and to recommend measures to correct these deficiencies and 


--- Page 12 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
12 
National Income, Saving 
revamp the statistical system to generate reliable statistics for the purpose of 
policy and planning at different levels of Government. The Commission 
submitted its report to Government in September, 2001. The Report of 
National Statistical Commission (2001), published by the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) , is itself a useful 
reference book on the database of the Indian economy.  This can be viewed or 
downloaded from the website www.mospi.nic.in/nscr/hp.htm. Most of data 
available in Government websites can be downloaded free of cost, either 
directly or as a registered user. In most cases, this registration is free of charge. 
For example, one can make a free registration in the website of the MoSPI and 
with the username, freely download all the reports and tables published by 
different offices under the MoSPI. For the Office of the RGI, one can simply 
visit its website www.censusindia.gov.in click on the link digital library and 
download all the census tables published from 1991 census onwards. 
There are also non-Government sources that publish these for the use of 
researchers and other data users (Certain private websites like www.indiastat. 
com provide India centric, sector specific and state specific data for the 
research fraternity, usually for a fee). The Centre for Monitoring Indian 
Economy (CMIE), Mumbai and its Economic Intelligence Services (EIS) 
provide detailed and up-to-date information on the Indian economy through a 
Monthly Review of Indian Economy and annual documents each covering a 
specific sector or subject in great detail. These publications bring together at 
one place not only data available with Government statistical agencies but also 
data collected by CMIE itself. The Economic and Political Weekly Research 
Foundation (EPWRF), Mumbai is another organization that publishes 
detailed time series data on a variety of subjects along with a description of 
related conceptual and methodological issues and quality of data, besides 
presenting statistics on specific areas in subject-specific Special Issues of the 
Economic and Political Weekly.  The search for data by an analyst like you 
can well start from one or more of the comprehensive sources enumerated 
above and move on, as necessary, to the primary agency concerned with the 
specific area of your interest. 
Data on any variable have to be classified suitably for facilitating analysis.  
And the classification system needs to be standardized when data on any 
variable are collected by several agencies and utilized by many in order to 
ensure meaningful collection of data and comparability of data across space 
and time.  At the international level, different agencies of the United Nations, 
like, the United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD), the OECD, the 
International Labour Office (ILO), etc. prepares these classifications for cross-
country comparison. For individual countries, these classification systems are 
recommended. The countries are advised to maintain full compatibility up to a 
certain level and then make additions/ alterations to suit the country specific 
needs. In India, usually, such classifications are expanded to suit the need of 
the country, while maintaining international comparability. Two important 
classificatory systems developed for use may be referred to here, as its utility 
cuts across sectors. One is the National Industrial Classification (NIC), 
developed by the Central Statistics Office (CSO) in consultation with all 
concerned.  It groups the entire spectrum of economic activities by means of a 
five-digit code structure. NIC has been revised from time to time in keeping 
with changes in the structure and variety of economic activities over the years.  
A Standard Industrial Classification, 1962 (SIC 62) developed by CSO was 
being used in the Sixties until NIC 70 was introduced. This was replaced by 
NIC 1987, which in turn was replaced by NIC 98 in December 1998.  The most 


--- Page 13 ---
 
 
13
Macro-Variable Data: 
National Income, Saving 
and Investment
recent revision of the NIC series is NIC 2008. All the NIC classifications are 
based on the relevant UN International Standard Industrial Classification 
(ISIC). NIC 2008 was, for instance, based on ISIC- Revision 4.  NIC 2008 has 
been developed and released for use in the place of NIC 04 in September, 
2008. NIC 2008 classifies the whole range of economic activity into 21 
Sections, 88 Divisions, 238 Groups, 403 Classes and 1,304 Sub-classes. NIC 
2008 is comparable completely with ISIC-Rev.4 up to the four-digit level.  The 
fifth digit (sub-class) inside each of the class (4 thdigit) takes care of the special 
features of the Indian economy. NIC is used for classifying data on variables 
like output, employment and income by economic activity.  In each release of 
the NIC, concordance tables are made available to facilitate recasting of past 
data as per the new classification, to the extent possible. 
The other classificatory system is the National Classification of Occupations 
(NCO), developed by the Directorate General of Employment & Training 
(DGE&T) of the Ministry of Labour & Employment . NCO 1958, a five-
digit code structure, was developed in the Fifties.  This was revised to NCO 
1968.  This was in use till recently.  This has now been replaced by NCO 2004 
(NCO04). The Indian NCOs have been based on the international occupational 
classification system developed by the International Labour Organisation (ILO) 
and revised from time to time.  NCO 1968 was patterned on the International 
Standard Classification of Occupations 1966 – ISCO 66 – of the ILO . 
While revising ISCO 66 to prepare ISCO 88, ILO incorporated the concept of 
skill for effective performance in the relevant occupation, utilizing for the 
purpose the International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED) .  
NCO 04 has followed the approach adopted in ISCO 88. It takes note of the 
skill required for satisfactory performance in the relevant occupations and has a 
six-digit code structure.  NCO 04 has 8 occupational divisions (the first digit of 
the code), 95 occupational groups (the second digit), 462 occupational families 
(the third digit) and 2484 occupations (the fifth and the sixth digits).  NCO is 
usuful for classification of the job seekers, the jobs and employment, thereby 
facilitating analysis of trends in the labour market and in the employment 
potential of the economy.  Past data can be recast as per NCO 04 with the help 
of concordance tables provided in NCO 04. 
A word of caution is necessary while using data assembled from sources other 
than one’s own. Data extracted from printed publications or websites have to 
be checked for printing errors/errors that occur while data are being posted on 
the websites. A check of the row and column totals of the tables and other 
identity relations relevant to the data under reference in the tables should take 
care of such errors. More importantly, you should also look into aspects of the 
data, like the concepts, definitions and methodology adopted by the source-
agency for collecting and compiling the data, coverage of data (like, whether 
data was collected from entire country or some specific areas, whether the 
sample drawn was based on a statistically reliable random sample or it was a 
purposive sample of a few selected locations, etc.), the methods used for 
collecting data, reliability and so on periodicity and timeliness in the 
availability of data, integrity (confidentiality), the data are firmly moored to 
what the data are actually supposed to reflect. These aspects are collectively 
referred to as “ metadata”. All these details are generally available in the 
publication containing the data or in a related publication of the agency 
publishing the data or in the relevant website of the agency. 
It would sometimes be useful and instructive to judge the Indian situation in an 
international setting. Publications of the United Nations and its agencies as also 


--- Page 14 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
14 
National Income, Saving 
agencies like the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank and 
regional agencies such as the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (OECD)1 provide data on different facets of the economies of the 
member countries including India along with information regarding 
comparability of country-wise data.  The IMF has formulated a “ Special Data 
Dissemination Standards ” (SDDS) covering the real sector (national 
accounts, production index, price indices, etc.), Fiscal Sector, Financial Sector, 
External Sector and Socio-demographic data for different countries to facilitate 
transparency in the compilation and dissemination of data on important aspects 
of the economy of individual countries and cross-country comparison of such 
data. Countries like India who have accepted the SDDS provide to IMF a 
National Summary Data Page  in respect of each of the areas and sub-areas 
listed in SDDS and metadata relating to such data, as per a Dissemination 
Format prescribed in SDDS. In addition, individual country agencies concerned 
disseminate an advance release calendar, which gives notice of the precise 
dates of release of data three months ahead of the date of release of the data, on 
the internet of the IMF’s Data Dissemination Bulletin Board (DSBB). Such 
information, as provided by any country covered by SDDS, can be accessed on 
the internet with the help of the Google search engine using the search 
parameter Special Data Dissemination Standards IMF. You can also visit the 
site of the United Nation’s Statistical Division databases at http://unstats.un.org/ 
unsd/databases.htm to access data compiled by different UN agencies on a host 
of economic and social parameters. 
Your capacity to utilize the vast amount of data available in the Indian 
Statistical System and examine critically the state of the society can be 
enhanced considerably by an intelligent combination of data across data 
domains. You have already come across some examples of such efforts – 
poverty ratios, concentration ratios for measuring the level of inequality, 
employment elasticity, labour productivity and capital productivity.  (Unit 4 on 
Poverty and Inequality – Policy Implications and Unit 5 on Employment and 
Unemployment – Policy Implications in Block 1 of MEC-005 on Indian 
Economic Policy in your first year Course). Other examples are the Human 
Development Index and Gender Development Index (Units 3 and 4 in the same 
Block of MEC-005). 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) State the major functions of CSO. 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
                                                            
 
1 India is not a member of OECD, which is an organization in which several countries in 
Europe are members. 


--- Page 15 ---
 
 
15
Macro-Variable Data: 
National Income, Saving 
and Investment
2) Name any three web sources where you can get data for your research, 
free of cost. 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
3) Which precautions should be taken care of while using data assembled 
from various sources? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
4) What do you understand by the term Special Data Dissemination 
Standard? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
Let us now turn our attention to data on macroeconomic variables like national 
income, saving and investment. 
21.3 NATIONAL INCOME AND RELATED 
MACRO ECONOMIC AGGREGATES 
21.3.1 System of National Accounts (SNA) 
How do you assess the performance of an economy?  You may be able to look 
at the trend in the production of rice or wheat to be able to say something about 
the performance of paddy or wheat crop.  You can make a similar assessment 
about the production of steel.  If you want to say something on agricultural 
production, where you find that some crops have done well and others have 
not, you think of making an overall assessment of agricultural performance by 
constructing an index of agricultural production to review the performance of 
agricultural production. But we should like to go beyond levels of output or 
production and look at performance in terms of incomes flowing from output in 
the form of rent, wages, interest and profit to those participating in the creation 
of output namely the factors of production – land, labour, capital and 
entrepreneurship (Since 1993, the role of the Government in influencing the 
economy, through various taxes and subsidies have also become an important 
item of analysis). Alternatively, we would like to base our judgment of 


--- Page 16 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
16 
National Income, Saving 
performance on value addition made by the production system namely, value 
of output net of the (intermediate) costs incurred in creating the output.  It is (i) 
this overall value addition computed for all sectors/activities of the economy, 
that is referred to as the National Product, (ii) macro-aggregates related to it, 
and (iii) trends in (i) and (ii), that can help you in analyzing the performance of 
an economy. 
As you know, National Income (NI) is the Net National Income (NNI). It is 
also used to refer to the group of macroeconomic aggregates like Gross 
National Income (GNI), Gross Domestic Product (GDP), Gross Value Added 
(GVA) and Net Value Added (NVA).  All these of course refer to the total 
value (in the sense mentioned above) of the goods and services produced 
during a period of time, the only differences between these aggregates being 
depreciation and/or net factor income from abroad. There are other 
macroeconomic aggregates related to these that are of importance in relation to 
an economy.  What data would you, as an analyst, like to have about the health 
of an economy?  Besides a measure of the National Income every year or at 
smaller intervals of time, you would like to know how fast it is growing over 
time.  What are the shares of the national income that flow to labour and other 
factors of production? How much of the national income goes to current 
consumption, how much to saving and how much to building up the capital 
needed to facilitate future economic growth?  What is the role of the different 
sectors and economic activities – in the public and private sectors or in the 
organized and unorganized activities or the households in the processes that 
lead to economic growth?  How does the level and pattern of economic growth 
affect or benefit different sections of society? How much money remains in the 
hands of the households for consumption and saving after they have paid their 
taxes (Personal Disposable Income) – an important indicator of the economic 
health of households?  What is the contribution of different institutions to 
saving?  How is capital formation financed? Such a list of requirements of data 
for analyzing trends in the magnitude and quality of, and also the prospects of, 
efforts for economic expansion being mounted by a nation can be very long.  
Such data, that is, estimates of national income and related macroeconomic 
aggregates from part of a system of National Accounts that gives a 
comprehensive view of the internal and external transactions of an economy 
over a period, say, a financial year and the interrelationships among the 
macroeconomic aggregates. National Accounts thus constitute an important 
tool of analysis for judging the performance of an economy vis-à-vis the aims 
of economic and development policy. 
The United Nations (UN) has been recommending guidelines in the form of a 
System of National Accounts (SNA) in order to promote international 
standards for the compilation of national accounts as an analytical tool and 
international reporting of comparable national accounting data. The first 
version of SNA was recommended in 1953.  This was revised in 1968 and then 
in 1993.  The fourth version (2008 SNA) was prepared under the auspices of 
the Inter-Secretariat Working Group on National Accounts consisting of the 
Commission of the European Communities (Eurostat), International Monetary 
Fund (IMF), Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD), the UN and the World Bank and adopted by the UN Statistical 
Commission in 2008. This system has been harmonized with other major 
statistical systems like the Balance of Payments Statistics and Government 
Finance Statistics of the IMF . The 2008 SNA contains a coherent, consistent 
and integrated set of macroeconomic accounts based on a set of internationally 
agreed concepts, definitions, classifications and accounting rules.  It provides a 


--- Page 17 ---
 
 
17
Macro-Variable Data: 
National Income, Saving 
and Investment
comprehensive accounting framework within which data can be compiled and 
presented in a format that is designed to facilitate economic analysis, formulation 
of policy and decision-making. You can read the entire SNA by accessing it at 
http://unstats.un.org/unsd/nationalaccount/docs/SNA2008.pdf.  
The informal sector or the unorganized sector occupies an important place in 
our economy, in terms of contribution to national income, employment and 
exports.  It is necessary, therefore, to bestow adequate attention to unorganized 
sector in the compilation of National Accounts and in other data domains and 
in international efforts at promoting collection of data on informal sector 
activities. The 15 th International Conference of Labour Statisticians (ICLS) 
(January, 1993) adopted a resolution on informal sector statistics with a view to 
helping member countries of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) in 
reporting comparable statistics of employment in the informal sector.  The 
resolution was endorsed by the UN Statistical Commission and by 1993 SNA. 
National Accounts are compiled in India using a mix of 1968 SNA and 1993 
SNA. India is also in the process of moving towards the full implementation of 
SNA methodology to the extent feasible. 
21.3.2  Estimates of National Income and Related 
Macroeconomic Aggregates 
a) Estimates Released by CSO 
The Central Statistics Office (CSO) in the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (MoSPI), Government of India compile and publish National 
Accounts, which include estimates of National Income and related 
macroeconomic aggregates like NNP, GNP, GDP and NDP, PFCE (private 
final consumption expenditure), saving, capital formation and so on for the 
country and for the public sector for every financial year.  Quarterly estimates 
of GDP are also prepared and released.  Estimates prepared for any year at the 
prices prevailing in that year are called estimates at current prices.  Estimates 
of national income and other aggregates at current prices is generally not used 
in analyzing changes in the magnitude of these aggregates over time, as price 
levels over time gets affected by inflation or deflation of an economy.  Suppose 
we need to compare the performance of the economy in terms of national 
income or other macroeconomic aggregates, over a period of time, say, five 
years. A comparison of estimates of, say, national income at current prices in 
the opening year and the final year of the five-year period will give us the 
increase or decrease, as the case may be, in national income at current prices.  
We can easily note that the quantum of change observed in national income is 
the composite measure of the change in national income and the changes in the 
prices of goods and services between the two points of time.  How then to get at 
the actual change, or the change in real terms in national income (or any other 
macroeconomic aggregate) over the period? This is done by removing the 
effect of changes in prices while comparing the aggregate in question at 
different points of time. Estimates of the aggregate for different years are, 
therefore, prepared at the estimates of the aggregate at constant (base year) 
prices.  The comparison of estimates of the aggregate at constant (base year) 
prices at different points of time is comparison of the magnitude of the 
aggregate in real terms and measures the real change over time in the 
magnitude of the aggregate.  The base year now in use is 2011-12. 


--- Page 18 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
18 
National Income, Saving 
CSO changes the base year from time to time in order to take into account the 
structural changes that take place in the economy and depict a true picture of 
the economy. It was 1948-49, initially, when estimates of National Income 
were first prepared by CSO and published in 1956.  It was shifted to 1960-61 in 
August, 1967, to 1970-71 in January, 1978, to 1980-81 in February,1988, to 
1993-94 in February,1999 to 1999-2000 in January, 2006; to 2004-05 in 
January 2010and to 2011-12 in January 2015.  Note that, in the beginning, the 
base years were the years in which the decennial population census was 
conducted, that is, the first year of every decade from 1961 to 1981.  The 
choice of the subsequent base years, namely, 1993-94, 1999-00 and 2004-05 
were a departure from this practice.  What are the reasons for this?  Estimates 
of workforce participation rates (WPR), that is, the proportion of workers to 
population for the benchmark years play an important role in the compilation 
of estimates of national income.  CSO had been making use of data on WPR 
available from decennial population censuses till 1981 while compiling 
national income estimates and for this reason the base year was the relevant 
decennial census year. It was, however, observed that the Employment and 
Unemployment Surveys of the National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) 
captured WPR better than the population censuses.  The base years chosen after 
1981 were thus 1993-94, 1999-2000 and 2004-05, making use of data on 
employment based on the NSSO 50 th, 55 th, 61 stRound and 68 th round Surveys 
on Employment and Unemployment 2 conducted during July ‘93 – June ’94, 
July ’99 – June 2000, July ‘03 – June ‘04 and July 2011- June 2012 respectively. 
After every revision of base year, the CSO publishes a set of results which 
provide comparable estimates of the years prior to the base year, so that a long 
time series data on national income aggregates can be analysed by the 
researchers and policy makers.  
Base year revisions differ from annual revisions in National Accounts 
primarily because of nature of changes. In annual revisions, changes are made 
only on the basis of updated data becoming available without making any 
changes in the conceptual framework or using any new data source, to ensure 
strict comparison over years. In case of base year revisions, apart from a shift 
in the reference year for measuring the real growth, conceptual changes, as 
recommended by the international guidelines, are incorporated. Further, 
statistical changes like revisions in the methodology of compilation, adoption 
of latest classification systems, and, inclusion of new and recent data sources 
are also made. Changes are also made in the presentation of estimates to improve 
ease of understanding for analysis and facilitate international comparability.  
Estimates of national accounts aggregates for different years are published in 
considerable detail in CSO’s Annual Publication “National Accounts Statistics 
(NAS)”.  The latest available NAS estimates are detailed in the publication 
NAS 2014 and the Press Notes of MoSPI dated the 31st January, 2015 3. The 
prerss note of January 2015 provides, for the first time, estimates of macro-
economic aggregates using the base year 2011-12. Note that in this release, for 
the first time, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) “at factor cost” has been 
discontinued. As is the practice internationally, industry-wise estimates have 
been presented as Gross Value Added (GVA) at basic prices, while “GDP at 
market prices has been referred to as GDP. Estimates of GVA at factor cost 
                                                            
 
2  Some employment data from Census 1991/2001 have also been used to supplement the data 
from NSSO. 
3  This publication and these Press Notes can also be accessed in the Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation website www.mospi.nic.in 
