--- Page 19 ---
 
 
19
Macro-Variable Data: 
National Income, Saving 
and Investment
(earlier called “GDP at factor cost”) can be compiled by using the estimates of 
GVA at basic prices and production taxes less subsidies. These have been 
given in Statement 3.1 of this note. For the years 2011-12, 2012-13 and  
2013-14, GVA at factor cost have been compiled and are presented in 
Statements 10.1 & 10.2 of the press release. 4Note that GVA at basic prices = 
GVA at factor cost + net taxes on production and GDP at market prices = GVA 
at basic prices + net taxes on products. 
CSO releases, every January, “first revised estimates”, earlier called the “Quick 
Estimates” of GDP, National Income, per capita National Income, Private Final 
Consumption Expenditure, Saving and Capital Formation by broad economic 
sectors5 for the financial year that ended in March of the preceding year.  Quick 
Estimates for any financial year are thus available with a time lag of ten 
months. It also releases, along with Quick Estimates for any financial year, 
revised estimates of national accounts aggregates for earlier financial years.  
Further, CSO brings out Advance Estimates of GDP, GNI , NNI and per 
capita NNI. The GDP, from the base year 2011-12,  is published at market 
prices, as per the latest international norms . Previously, it was published 
at factor cost . Advance estimates of the GDPfor the current financial year is 
published in February, two months before the close of the financial year.  
These advance estimates are revised thereafter and the undated advance 
estimates are released by the end of June, three months after the close of the 
financial year. Meanwhile, by the end of the March, Quarterly Estimates of 
GDP for the quarter ending December of the preceding year are also released.  
Thus by the end of March every year, that is, by the end of every financial year, 
advance estimates of national income for the financial year that just ended, first 
revised estimates of national income for the preceding financial year and the 
quarterly estimates of national income up to the preceding quarter, that is, up to 
the quarter that ended in December of the financial year that just ended become 
available. 
CSO sets before itself an advance release calendar for the release of national 
accounts statistics over a period of two years. 6  For instance, the Advanced 
Release Calendar for the years 2015 indicates that the Quarterly Estimate of 
GDP for any quarter during the period January, 2015 to end of September, 
2015 would be available at the end of the next quarter. It also indicates the 
dates on which Advance Estimates, Quick Estimates and Revised Advance 
Estimates pertaining to the financial years ending on the 31 st March, 2006, 30 th 
June, 2006, 29th September, 2006 and 29th December, 2006, respectively would be 
released.  Similarly, Revised  Advance Estimates for the financial year 2004-05, 
Quick Estimates for the financial year 2004-05, Advance Estimates for the 
financial year 2005-06 and Revised Advance Estimates for the financial year 
2005-06 would be released on the 30 th June, 2005, the 31 st January, 2006, the 
7th February, 2006 and the 30th June, 2006, respectively.  CSO has already (30th 
January, 2015) released the following estimates, as proposed: 
i) First Revised Estimates for 2013-14 at current and constant (2011-12) prices, 
                                                            
 
4  These 2 paragraphs have been taken from the Press release of the CSO dated 30 th January 
2015. 
5  1. Agriculture, Forestry & Fishing. 2. Mining & Quarrying, 3. Manufacturing, 4. Electricity, 
Gas & Water Supply, 5. Construction, 6. Trade, Hotels & Restaurants, 7. Transport, Storage 
& Communication, 8. Financing, Insurance, Real Estate & Business Services, 9. Community, 
Social & Personal Services. 
6  This also takes care of SDDS referred to earlier. 


--- Page 20 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
20 
National Income, Saving 
ii) First revised Estimates of GDP, National Income, per capita National 
Income, Consumption Expenditure, Saving and Capital Formation for 
2013-14 (along with revised estimates of the earlier two years)at current 
and constant (2011-12) prices, 
iii) Advance Estimates of GDP, GNP and NNP and per capita NNP for  
2014-15 at current and constant (2011-12) prices (on the 9th February, 2015). 
The NAS 2014 presents estimates of GNP, NNP and the corresponding 
domestic products GDP andNDP at factor cost and market prices at current and 
constant (2004-05) prices7. Besides giving estimatesof the components of GDP, 
estimates like Government Final Consumption Expenditure(GFCE), Private 
Final Consumption Expenditure (PFCE) in the domestic market, Gross 
Domestic Saving (GDS), Gross Domestic Capital Formation (GDCF), Exports, 
Imports, net factor income from abroad and the share ofthe public sector in 
GDP it presents8, estimates of the following aggregates at current and constant 
prices(2011-12 prices) for 2013-14 and the period 2011-12 to 2013-14: 
i) The contribution to GDP and NDP of different economic activities 9. 
ii) Quarterly estimates of GDP by broad economic sectors; 
iii) GDP of sub-groups of each of the economic activities (see footnote 9) 1.1 
and also separately for its livestock sub-sector 10, 1.2,1.3,3.1,3.2,4, the sub-
sectors of 4 namely, electricity, gas and water supply. 
iv) NDP for the sub-group 10, namely, Public Administration & Defence, by 
(a) Central Government and Union Territories; (b) individual State 
Governments; (c) local authorities; and (d) quasi government bodies. 
v) Factor incomes (compensation for employees and operating surplus/mixed 
income) of NDP for each economic activity (at current prices). 
vi) Factor incomes of NDP of the unorganized segment of each economic 
activity (at current prices). 
vii) Property incomes (rent and interest) and Financial Intermediation Services 
Indirectly Measured (FISIM) in the organized and unorganized segments 
of each economic activity (at current prices). 
viii) Net National Disposable Income, Private Income, Personal Income and 
Personal Disposable Income. 
                                                            
 
7 As mentioned earlier, the shift in the base for constant prices to 1999-00 was made in 
January, 2006, that is, after the publication of NAS 2005 in May, 2005. NAS 2006, due in 
June, 2006, would be presenting estimates at constant prices at 1999-00. Besides the press 
note of MoSPI referred to in the text, the Economic Survey 2006 of the Ministry of 
Finance presented by the Finance Minister to Parliament on the 27 th February, 2006 also 
contains estimates released by CSO at current and constant (1999-00) prices for the years 
2005-06 (Advanced Estimates), 2004-05 (Quick Estimates), 2003-04 and 2002-03.  
8  Estimates of some of these macro aggregates are also published in the Monthly Bulletin of 
RBI. 
9 1. Agriculture and Allied Activities; 1.1. Agriculture; 1.2. Forestry& Logging; and 1.3. 
Fishing; 2. Mining & Quarrying; 3. Manufacturing; 4. Electricity, Gas, Water Supply and 
other utility services; 5. Construction; 6. Trade, Repair, Hotels & Restaurants; 7. Transport, 
Storage, Communication and services related to broadcasting; 8. Financial services, 9. Real 
Estate Ownership of dwelling &Professional Services; 10. Public administration and defence 
and 11 Other Services; 
10The livestock sub-sector is a sub-sector of the sub-group ‘agriculture’ (1.1 in the preceding 
footnote) and includes animal husbandry, (fuel & manure), silk worm cocoons and honey. 


--- Page 21 ---
 
 
21
Macro-Variable Data: 
National Income, Saving 
and Investment
ix) GDP and NDP of the Public Sector by type of public sector institutions 11 
and economic activity. 
x) Factor incomes of Public Sector NDP for each economic activity by type 
of institutions (current prices). 
xi) Property incomes and FISIM in each economics activity of Public Sector 
by type of institutions. 
xii) Value of output, inputs and consumption of fixed capital (CFC) for a 
number of economic activities. 
xiii) Financial Assets and Liabilities of the Household sector. 
xiv) Economic and Purpose Classification of Current and Capital Expenditure 
of Administrative Departments (current prices). 
xv) Production Accounts of (a) Railways, (b) Communication, (c) Departmental 
Enterprises other than (a) and (b), and (d) Producers of Government 
Services. 
xvi) Detailed external transactions accounts. 
xvii) Depreciation as provided in the books of accounts of public sector 
institutional groups12 and private corporate sector; and 
xviii) Time series of GNI, GDP NNP, NDP, Per capita NNI and other 
macroeconomic aggregates like CFC, net factor income from abroad, 
PFCE in the domestic market, GFCE exports, imports and mid-year 
population from 1950-51 to 2013-1413. 
Estimates of the aggregates referred to at (i), (vii), (xiii), (xvi) and PFCE and 
its distribution by object and by type of goods, GFCE for the period 2004-05 to 
2012-13 at current and constant (2004-05)Prices and the time series estimates 
referred to at (xvii) above at current and constant (2004-05) prices have been 
released by CSO in NAS 2014 by the end of May 2014 and posted on the 
MoSPI website. 
What about separate estimates of National Income aggregates for rural and 
urban areas? CSO publishes estimates of NDP for rural and urban areas for 
each economic activity (see footnote 8) at current prices for each of the base 
year, namely, 1970-71, 1980-81, 1993-94, 1999-2000 and 2004-05.  
b)  Other Publications Giving CSO’s Estimates 
The Handbook of Statistics on the Indian Economy 14 – 2013-14, published 
by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) also publishes time series from 1952-53 
of macro economic aggregates (that would otherwise have to be compiled from 
different issues of the NAS document) like GDP at factor cost, CFC, NDP at 
factor cost, indirect taxes less subsidies, NDP at market prices, net factor 
income from abroad, GNP at factor cost, NNP at factor cost, GNP at market 
price, NNP at market price, personal disposable income, GDP and NDP of 
                                                            
 
11  Administrative Departments, Departmental Enterprises, Non-departmental Enterprises and 
Quasi-Government Bodies. 
12 Administrative Departments, Public Sector departmental Enterprises subdivided into (i) 
Railways, (ii) Communication; and (iii) others and Public Sector Non-Departmental 
Enterprises subdivided into (i) financial companies; and (ii) non-financial companies. 
13 The Pre-budget Economic survey also presents the time series on GNP, GDP, NNP and per 
capita NNP and mid year population. 
14 Published annually. This can downloaded from the RBI WEBSITE http://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/ 
rdocs/Publications/PDFs/000HSE13120914FL.pdf 


--- Page 22 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
22 
National Income, Saving 
public sector (from 1960-61), gross and net domestic capital formation, per 
capita GNP and NNP, at one place. The Economic and Political Weekly 
research Foundation (EPWRF) also presents comprehensive national income 
statistics in a time series format from time to time along with details of 
concepts, methodology and data sources for ready use by researchers. It 
provides data from 1950-51 to 2011-12 with 2004-05 as the base year 
(http://www.epwrfits.in/TimeSeriesDataResearch.aspx)” is the latest. This 
can be obtained from EPWRF either as a subscriber or through a pay per 
module mode.  National Accounts Statistics of most countries and areas of the 
world can be accessed at the UNSD website http://unstats.un.org/ 
unsd/nationalaccount/madt.asp. At the time of writing the module, the latest 
year for which this data is available is 2013. 
c)  Limitations of the Estimates 
The concepts and methodology used and the data sources utilized for making 
these estimates are set out in two publications of the CSO, namely, “National 
accounts statistics : Sources and Methods” (available for the base 2004-05 
series, published by the CSO in 2012)  and “New Series on National 
Accounts (Base 2004-05)” (CSO, 2010). The MoSPI Press Note dated the 
31st January, 2006 releasing Quick Estimates of National Income, etc., for 
2004-05 indicates briefly the changes in the new series of National Accounts 
Statistics with base year 2004-05. The publication NAS- Manual of estimating 
state and District Income, 2008 provide the methodology for making estimates 
of GSDP and GDDP. Besides, the publication “National Accounts Statistics” 
brought out every year has a chapter titled “Notes on Methodology and 
Revision in the Estimates”. This chapter in the NAS also contains tables 
explaining, sector-wise, reasons for the revision in GDP growth rate as per the 
different types of estimates (like revised advance, quick, etc., estimates) 
released in the preceding year. For instance, NAS 2014 gives the reasons for 
revision in GDP growth rate during. 
i) 2012-13 between the provisional Estimates released in May, 2013 and first 
revised estimates released in January, 2014; 
ii) 2011-12 between First Revised Estimates released in January, 2013 and 
Estimates released in January, 2014; and 
iii)  2010-11 between Estimates released in January, 2013 and Estimates 
released in January, 2014. 
Limitations of estimates of national income aggregates arise from insufficiency 
of data or the choice of data in capturing adequately income flows. Estimates 
of GDP/NDP at factor cost by sectors can be classified into two broad 
categories from the point of view of differences in the data base – direct 
estimates and indirect estimates. Direct estimates are based on statistics 
available annually on a regular basis so that these reflect year-to-year variations 
in the volume of the economic activities concerned. The translation of such 
annual statistics into National Accounts aggregates requires the use of certain 
norms and ratios or other assumptions. Resort to readily available indications 
of the economic activity in question has often to be made when and if there are 
delays on the part of the data-generating agencies in supplying the required 
regular annual data. As a result, revisions made in the estimates of national 
accounts aggregates when regular annual data become available later lead to 
major changes in the provisional estimates released earlier. Direct estimates  
mostly cover the institutional groups, (i) the public sector (and the Government 


--- Page 23 ---
 
 
23
Macro-Variable Data: 
National Income, Saving 
and Investment
component within it), and (ii) the private corporate sector, or what is usually 
referred to as the ‘organised’ segment of the economy. On the other hand, 
indirect estimates  require to be made when regular annual statistics are not 
available in respect of any economic activity. How are these made? Estimates 
based on periodic benchmark surveys are first derived for the survey year. 
These are then extrapolated forward or backward, as required, on the basis of 
physical indicators of the economic activities concerned. The degree of 
approximation involved in this procedure depends critically on the sensitivity 
of the indicator in reflecting year-to- year variations in the volume of the 
economic activity concerned. Indirect estimates are used in respect of the 
institutional groups, (a) households, and (b) non-profit institutions serving 
households (NPISH) and the “unorganized” segment of the economy. The 
share of direct estimates in aggregate GDP has increased from 57.6 per cent in 
the series with 1970-71 as the base year to 63.7 per cent in the series with 
1980-81 as the base year and to 89.6 per cent in the series with 1993-94 as the 
base year. The share of direct estimates in different sectors in the GDP series 
with 2004-05 as the base year varied from 100 per cent in Mining, Registered 
Manufacturing, Electricity, Gas & Water Services, Railways and Public 
Administration &Defence sector to about 21 per cent in trade sector 15. As such, 
the share of organized sector in 2012-13 had become only 44.7 per cent of the 
economy (with base year 2004-05, page 1i, NAS 2014). 
The intention of this sub-section is not to comment adversely on the admittedly 
complex task of compiling national accounts statistics but to draw attention to 
limitations that need to be kept in mind by users as economists/statisticians/ 
analysts utilizing these data while carrying out their research, analytical and 
advisory work. Improvements in data and methodology for estimating national 
accounts aggregates constitute a continuous process, calling for efforts across 
sectors, in which Ministries in the central Government, regulatory agencies, the 
CSO, the State Directorates of Economics & Statistics and other research 
institutions participate. The interesting reader may like to familiarize 
himself/herself with the work being done by the Indian Association for 
Research in National Income and Wealth, New Delhi. Their Bulletin would 
show the efforts underway to bring about further improvements in national 
accounts methodologies and statistics. The recommendations of the  National 
Statistical Commission (2001) will also pave the way to further enhancement 
of the quality of these estimates. 
21.3.3 The Input-Output Table 
Any economic activity is dependent on inputs from other economic activities 
for generating its output and the output from this economic activity serves as 
inputs for producing the output from other activities. Data relating to the 
interrelationship among different sectors of the economy and among different 
economic activities are thus important for analyzing the behavior of the 
economy and, therefore, for formulation of development plans and setting 
targets of macro variables like output, investment and employment. Such an 
input-output table will also be useful for analyzing the impact of changes in a 
sector of the economy or economic activity on other sectors of the economy 
and indeed the entire economy. An Input-Output Transactions Table 
(IOTT) is prepared by CSO from time to time. The latest to be published is the 
one relating to 2007-0816. It gives, besides the complete table, the methodology 
                                                            
 
15 This paragraph is based on Section 13.2 Chapter 13 of the Report of the National Statistical 
Commission.  
16  This can be accessed at http://mospi.nic.in/Mospi_New/upload/iott-07-08_6nov12.htm 


--- Page 24 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
24 
National Income, Saving 
adopted, the database made use of, analysis of the results and the 
supplementary tables derived from the IOTT giving the input structure and the 
commodity composition of the output. The Planning Commission updates and 
recalibrates the IOTT and prepares an Input-Output table for the base period of 
a Five Year Plan being formulated and another Input-Output table for the 
terminal year of the Five Year Plan. The detailed results of this exercise, 
carried out in the Planning Commission for the formulation of any Five Year 
Plan, are published by the Planning Commission as the Technical Note to the 
Five Year Plan. The Technical Note contains the relevant Input-Output Table, 
the methodology adopted and related material. The latest available in this series 
is the Technical Note tothe Tenth Five Year Plan. The IOTT of CSO and the 
Input-Output Table of the Planning Commission would be useful to researchers 
interested in exploiting the power of the input-output technique in economic 
and econometric analysis in their research work. 
21.3.4 Regional Accounts – Estimates of State Income and 
Related Aggregates 
a) Estimates of States Domestic Product (SDP) Prepared and Released 
by State Governments and Union Territory Administrations 
State Accounts Statistics (SAS) consist of various accounts showing the flows 
of all transactions between the economic agents constituting the State economy 
and their stocks. The most important aggregate of SAS is the State Domestic 
Product (SDP) (State Income). Estimates of GSDP and NSDP at constant and 
current prices are being prepared and published by the Directorates of 
Economics and Statistics (DES) of all State Governments and Union 
Territory Administrations except the Union Territory Administrations of 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and Lakshadweep.  
b) Other Publications Giving Estimates of SDP Made by State/UT DES 
The State Governments and Union Territory Administrations send their 
estimates of SDP to the CSO. These estimates at current and constant prices are 
available in the CSO website. The pre-Budget Economic Survey presented to 
Parliament by the Finance Minister every year contains these estimates (as a 
time series from 1993-94) of Net State Domestic Product (NSDP) at current 
prices. The RBI Handbook  referred to above provides more detailed data 
drawn from the CSO website. It presents: 
i)  estimates of NSDP at current and constant prices – one set with the 
constant prices base 1980-81 for the period 1980-81 to 1998-99 and the 
other with the constant prices base 1993-94 for 1993-94 to 2003-04; and 
ii)  estimates of NSDP by economic activity and per capita NSDP at current 
and constant (1993-94) prices for the period 1993-94 to 2003-04; (new 
series). 
Estimates of State Income (gross State Domestic Product) made by States and 
Union Territories by economic activity at current as well as constant prices are 
readily available in a (short) time series format at one place in the publication 
of the CMIE (EIS), Mumbai referred to above. These estimates at current and 
constant prices by sectors for the period 1960-61 to 2000-01 have also been 
brought together at one place for the use of research scholars by the EPWRF in 
their publication Domestic Product of States of India: 1960-61 to 2000-01 


--- Page 25 ---
 
 
25
Macro-Variable Data: 
National Income, Saving 
and Investment
(EPWRF, June , 2003) . These are also available on the website of the 
EPWRF and in user-friendly and interactive CD ROMS.17 
c) Limitations of Estimates of SDP 
The preparation of estimates of SDP call for much more detailed data than for 
the preparation of national level estimates, especially on flows of goods and 
services and incomes across geographical boundaries of States/ Union 
Territories. Conceptually, estimates of SDP can be prepared by adopting two 
approaches. These are the income originating approach and the income 
accruing approach. In the former case, the measurement relates to the income 
originating to the factors of production physically located within the area of a 
state. In other words it is the net value of goods and services produced within a 
state. In the latter case, the measurement relates to the income accruing to the 
factors of production physically located within the area of a State. Here,  the 
measurement relates to the income accuring to the normal residents of a State. 
The income accruing approach provides better measure of the welfare of the 
residents of the State. Preparation of estimates of SDP using the income 
accruing approach is not possible because data on inter-State flow of goods and 
services are not available. Compilation of other aggregates of State accounts is 
also problematic because the data required for the purpose, especially on inter-
State flows of incomes, are not available. 18 Thus only the income originating 
approach is used in preparing estimates of SDP. This has to be kept in mind 
while using estimates of SDP. 
Efforts have been made by the CSO over the years to bring about a good 
degree of uniformity across States and Union Territories in SDP concepts and 
methodology. The major milestones in these efforts are:19 
i) the recommendations of the First report of the Committee on Regional 
Accounts (CSO, 1974) set up by the Government of India and the Final 
Report of the Committee (CSO , 1976) in the form of a set of Standard 
Tables to be prepared and a system of regional accounts, besides 
suggestions regarding steps to fill gaps in data vis a vis  those needed for 
compilation of SDP, for the guidance of DES of States/Union Territories; 
ii)  the article “ Mahabaleshwar Accounts of States” in the October, 1976 
issue of the Journal of Income & Wealth; 
iii) the article “ The Status of State Income Estimates” appearing in the 
October, 1980 issue of the Monthly Abstract of Statistics (CSO); and 
iv) the article “Comparable Estimates of SDP – 1970-71 to 1975-76”  appearing 
NAS, January, 1979 of CSO, which described the methodology of 
preparing estimates of SDP. 
v) the publication “ National Accounts Statistics: Manual of Estimating 
State and District Income, 2008” published by the CSO in 2008. 
Are the estimates of SDP of different States/Union Territories comparable? 
Probably not. The successive Finance Commissions have found it necessary to 
get comparable estimates of NSDP and per capita NSDP made for their use for 
periods relevant to their work. These comparable estimates of SDP are 
published in the Reports of the successive Finance Commissions from the 
                                                            
 
17  E-mail id for queries to EPWRF: epwrf@vsnl.com . 
18  The Report of the National Statistical Commission, Chapter 13 section 13.7. 
19  ibid.  See also the Preface to EPWRF publication on SDP in the preceding sub-section (b) on 
other publications giving SDP estimates. 


--- Page 26 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
26 
National Income, Saving 
sixties. The EPWRF publication on SDP referred to earlier also provides 
comparable estimates of SDP and evaluates these with reference to those made 
for the periods 1960-61 to 1964-65, 1976-77 to 1978-79, 1982-83 to 1984-85, 
1987-88 to 1989-90 and 1994-95 to 1996-97 for the use of the Finance 
Commissions. The question of comparability of estimates of SDP of different 
States/Union Territories is important from the point of view of their use in 
econometric work involving Inter-State or regional comparisons or the 
contribution of the regions or the States to the national product. 
21.3.5 Regional Accounts – Estimates of Districts Income 
The need for preparing estimates of district income has become urgent in the 
context of decentralization of governance and the importance of, and the 
emphasis on, decentralized planning or planning from below. Of late, it has 
gained a special importance, as this is one of the three indicators to compile the 
district-wise Human Development Index, prepared by some of the States. The 
State Governments have realized this need and estimates of District Domestic 
Product (DDP) are being prepared by a number of State DES and published by 
them in State Statistical Handbooks/Abstracts/Economic Surveys and are 
also posted on their websites . The position in different States and Union 
Territories (zone-wise) is as follows: 
Type of estimate of DDP State/ UT Base 
year 
1. for all years till 2013-14 Rajasthan 2004-05 
2. for all  years till 2012-
13 
Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Assam, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Meghalaya, West Bengal 
2004-05 
3. for all  years till 2011-
12 
Bihar, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Chhattisgarh, Punjab, 
Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh 
2004-05 
4. for all years till 2010-11 Nagaland, Odisha, Uttarakhand 2004-05 
5. Up to 2005-06/ 2006-
07/ 2007-08 
Jharkhand, Mizoram, Andaman &Nicobar 
Islands/ Manipur / Sikkim 
1999 – 
2000 
6. Not available Goa, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Tripura, 
Delhi, Puducherry 
 
7. Not required Chandigarh, as the UT has only 1 district  
For some of the States in 6, it might be available with the State Directorate of 
Economics and Statistics, but not available centrally at one location. 
The methodology for preparing estimates of district income at present is based 
on20 
i) The recommendations of the Report21 of the Technical Group set up by 
the Department of Statistics for recommending a suitable methodology 
for preparing estimates of district income;  
ii) The methodology developed in August, 1996 jointly by the DES of Uttar 
Pradesh and Karnataka – a task entrusted to these organization by CSO in 
1995. 
                                                             
20 See Methodology of estimating State and District Domestic Product, CSO, 2008. 
21 Submitted in January, 1987. 


--- Page 27 ---
 
 
27
Macro-Variable Data: 
National Income, Saving 
and Investment
The income originating approach is adopted for compiling district income 
estimates in the light of the kind of data that is available. As mentioned earlier, 
the income accrual approach can measure the welfare of the normal residents 
of the district in a more reliable manner. However, as flow of funds from 
district to district is not available and difficult to estimate, the income 
originating approach is followed. It is necessary to make adjustments, in the 
estimates based on the income originating approach, for flow of incomes 
across territories of districts that are rich in resources like minerals or forest 
resources and where there is a daily flow of commuters from other districts. 
There are a lot of problems in the context of data availability separately for 
each district. For most of the commodity producing sectors, like agriculture, 
mining and registered manufacturing, data is fairly available. But, in remaining 
sectors, it is very scanty. Even within the agricultural sector, even if one can 
get the district-wise production, prices at each district sometimes may not be 
available. In case of entire unorganized sector, where national and State level 
estimates are based on periodic surveys, reliable district level estimates from 
these data cannot be prepared due to limitations in sample size.  
21.3.6 National Income and Levels of Living 
The foregoing paragraphs have talked about the availability of estimates of 
macroeconomic aggregates at the national and state levels, in different 
economic activities, in segments of economic and geographic spaces like 
public and private sectors, and households and rural and urban areas. What do 
trends in the magnitude of these variables say about the welfare of different 
sections of society? Precious little, perhaps, especially when these are 
considered without information on the manner in which the macroeconomic 
aggregates are distributed among these sections of society. Per-capita national 
income or even per-capita personal disposable income can only indicate overall 
(national) averages. Distribution of population by levels of income can be a big 
step forward in understanding how well the performance in the growth of GDP 
has translated into or has not translated into, improvements in levels of living 
for sections of society below levels considered the minimum desirable level. It 
would also help us analyse whether inequalities in levels of living have 
worsened or abated. What about the level of unemployment or levels and 
quality of employment? What about the health status of people? Or, to consider 
all these indicators of the state of a society and different sections of society, 
what are the levels of human development and gender discrimination? Such 
lines of analysis and the data required for the purpose are important from the 
point of view of planning for a strategy of growth with equity. 
The Quinquennial Consumer Expenditure Surveys of the NSSO provides 
such data. These provide the distribution of households by monthly per capita 
consumption expenditure (MPCE) classes. You have already looked at such 
data and their implications for planning and policy in Unit 4 on “Poverty and 
Inequality – Policy Implications” in Block 1 on “Framework of the Indian 
Economy” in Course MEC-105 on “Indian Economic Policy” in your first year 
course. As you have seen there, the latest available data on this relate to  
2011-12, flowing from the 68 th round NSSO survey of 2011-12. The next 
such comprehensive survey (74 thRound of NSS)is planned in 2016-17. You 
have also looked at the data on recent trends on growth rate of employment and 
the growth rate of the economy (employment elasticity) in Unit 5 on 
“Employment and Unemployment: Policy Implications” and comprehensive 
indicators like Human Development Index and the Gender Development Index 


--- Page 28 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
28 
National Income, Saving 
in Units 3 and 4 in Block 1 of Course MEC-005. You would have noted that 
the Human Development Reports prepared by the Planning Commission 
(available on its website) and several State Governments contain detailed 
data on these questions. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) List the various components of the system of National Accounts. 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
2) Which have been the base years for compilation of national accounts 
statistics (NAS)? What is the difference between base year revision and 
revision of estimates in annual series of the NAS? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
3) In addition to CSO, which other agencies bring out the data on macro 
economic aggregates? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
4) By whom the estimates of state income and related aggregates are made? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
