--- Page 82 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
82 
3) Identify 3 different sub-sectors of financial market and name a few major 
sources of data for each of these sub-sectors of financial markets. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
23.4  LET US SUM UP  
We have, in this Unit, surveyed the data available in the area of trade and 
finance. We noted that data on the volume of merchandise trade by 
commodities and countries, direction of trade, trade balance, quantity and unit 
value index numbers of imports and exports and indices depicting different 
measures of the terms of trade are available from the DGCI&S and are also 
presented as a time series in the RBI Handbook 2013-14, besides the 
Handbook of Statistics of the SEBI . Data on trade in services and on 
merchandise are available as part of BoP data of the RBI. There is a divergence 
between merchandise trade deficit/surplus data provided by DGCI&S and that 
shown by BoP data of RBI and the reasons for such a discrepancy are related to 
the manner in which the two sources collect the basic data. 
Data are available in the RBI Handbook (long time series) on public finances 
such as receipts and expenditure of the Central and the State Governments, the 
manner in which these Governments mobilize resources through taxes and non-
tax revenue borrowings, the patterns of their expenditure – developmental 
outlays, debt servicing, economic and social services and so on – and the 
various types of (fiscal) deficits that they run and the manner in which these are 
financed. Data on balance of payments, inflow of foreign investment, foreign 
aid/borrowings, assistance and the size of foreign debt are also available in the 
RBI Handbook. So are the data on the money stock, the different monetary 
aggregates like M 0, M 1 and M 3, and the new monetary aggregates NM 2 and 
NM3 and “C” components of the money stock, the sources of change in the 
money stock and their “S” components and liquidity aggregates L 1, L2 and L 3. 
The role of the banks and financial institutions in the mobilization of savings 
and the deployment of credit to different economic activities, their functional 
and operational efficiency in terms of indicators like NPA and CRAR can be 
examined well with the time series data available in the RBI Handbook and 
such an effort can be supplemented with information on profitability provided 
by the RBI’s Report on Trends in Banking. Similarly, the functioning of the 
financial market in terms of the structure of interest rates in different markets, 
resources mobilized through different modes like capital issues, private 
placement, equities with and without premium, preference shares and CCPS, 
total resources raised from the primary market, trends in trading in stock 
exchanges, share price indices and market capitalization, indicators of liquidity 
like traded value ratio and market capitalization to GDP ratio and measures of 
comparative evaluation of indices (BSE SENSEX, BSE 100 Index, etc.,) like 
Price to Earnings Ratio and Price to Book Ratio, can be analysed adequately 


--- Page 83 ---
 
 
83
Trade and Finance with the data available on these aspects in the RBI Handbook and the 
Handbook of Statistics , published by SEBI. The RBI Handbook, especially 
with the special features incorporated in its website version, stand out as an 
invaluable source of data on finance and also trade. 
23.5 EXERCISES  
1) How can you analyse trend in foreign trade? Discuss the role of unit value 
index and quantum index in this regard. 
2) Discuss the kind of time series data on money and banking compiled by 
RBI. How this data can be useful for research? 
3) List the types of data on financial market compiled by SEBI. To what 
extent is it adequate to analyse the financial markets? 
23.6 SOME USEFUL BOOKS  
Ministry of Finance, 
Govt. of India 
:
 Economic Survey – 2005-06 and earlier years, 
Ministry of Finance, Govt. of India, New Delhi. 
Budget Documents, Ministry of Finance, Govt. 
of India, New Delhi. 
Reserve Bank of 
India 
:
 Report on Currency and Finance – 2005, RBI, 
Mumbai. 
Report on Trends in Banking – 2005, RBI, 
Mumbai. 
World Trade 
Organization 
:
 International Trade Statistics – 2005, WTO, 
Geneva. 
Also accessible at http://www.wto.org/english/res_e/statis_e.htm 
23.7 ANSWERS OR HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) See Sub-section 23.2.1 
2) 1998-99. 
3) See Sub-section 23.2.1 
4) See Sub-section 23.2.2 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) The budget documents of the central and the state governments, the pre-
budget economic survey, RBI Indian Economy 2005, Monthly Bulletin of 
the RBI. 
2) The excess of total expenditure including loans over revenue receipts – net 
lending of the central government. 
3) See Sub-section 23.3.1 (sub head and ‘d’) 


--- Page 84 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
84 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) RBI Bulletin, Nov. 2000 under the title ‘New Monetary and Liquidity 
aggregates’. 
2) See Sub-section 23.3.2 
3) The RBI Handbook of Statistics of Indian Economy 2005 and the 
Handbook of Statistics on Indian Securities Market 2005 provide 
comprehensive data on the financial market. 


--- Page 85 ---
 
 
85
Social Sector
UNIT 24 SOCIAL SECTOR 
Structure 
24.0 Objectives 
24.1 Introduction 
24.2 Employment, Unemployment and Labour Force 
 24.2.1 Magnitude of Employment and Unemployment 
 24.2.2 Quality/Adequacy of Employment 
 24.2.3 Labour Welfare 
24.3 Education 
 24.3.1 Educational Infrastructure 
 24.3.2 Infrastructure Utilization and Access to Educational Opportunities 
24.4 Health 
 24.4.1 Health Infrastructure 
 24.4.2 Public Health, Morbidity and Mortality Indicators 
 24.4.3 National Family Health Survey (NFHS) 
24.5 Shelter and Amenities 
24.6 Social Consequences of Development 
24.7 Environment 
24.8 Quality of Life 
24.9 Let Us Sum Up 
24.10 Some Useful Books 
24.11 Answers or Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
24.0 OBJECTIVES 
After going through this Unit, you will be able to: 
• know the sources of data on various aspects of employment and unemployment, 
labour welfare, education, health, shelter, safe drinking water, etc., which 
determine the quality of life of the people; 
• Identify the various organization/agencies involved in the compilation of 
data on different aspects of social sector; 
• describe the different concepts used in collection of data on social sector; 
and 
• explain the kind of data/information available in the various publications 
containing data on social sector. 
24.1  INTRODUCTION 
Social Sector consists of education, health, employment, shelter, sanitation, 
other housing amenities, environment, and adverse consequences of 
development and levels of living or quality of life in general. Investments in 
 


--- Page 86 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
86 
this sector pay rich dividends in terms of rising productivity, distributed 
growth, reduction in social and economic inequalities and levels of poverty 
although after a relatively longer time span than in the case of investment in 
physical sectors. Let us look at the kind of data available in this sector. 
24.2 EMPLOYMENT, UNEMPLOYMENT AND 
LABOUR FORCE 
Employment is the means to participate in the development process. Creation 
of employment opportunities is an important instrument for tackling poverty 
and to empower people, especially women. Regarding data on employment, 
firstly, we should know how many are employed and how many are ready to 
work but are unable to gain access to employment opportunities. How do 
women fare in these matters? Or, for that matter, what is the experience of men 
and women belonging to different social/religious/disadvantaged groups? Are 
children employed in any economic activity that is not only hazardous to their 
health but which also adversely impacts on our dream of a golden future for 
them through efforts to ensure their mental and physical well-being? What is 
the quality of employment opportunities available to the work force? What are 
the conditions in which people work? Let us first look at data on the magnitude 
of employment and unemployment. 
24.2.1 Magnitude of Employment and Unemployment 
Data on employment in selected sectors are available from several sources. 
Data on Employment in the organized sector of the economy is available from 
the Employment Market Information (EMI) programme of the Directorate 
General of Employment & Training (DGE&T), in the Ministry of Labour . 
This is based on statutory returns submitted 1 to the employment exchange of 
the area every quarter by non-agricultural establishments in the private sector 
employing at least 25 persons and all public sector establishments (excluding 
defense forces and Indian missions posted abroad) irrespective of their size. 
Smaller establishments, that is, those employing 10 to 24 persons submit such 
returns on a voluntary basis. Data on employment levels in the organized sector 
of the economy (as defined above) is thus available every quarter at district 
levels through Quarterly Employment Reviews released by the DGE&T and 
the Directorates of Employment (DEs) in the State Governments and Union 
Territory Administrations. The Annual Employment Reviews released by the 
DGE&T and the DEs provide more detailed data on employment at the three 
levels of NIC code. The returns also provide data on the number of vacancies 
occurring in the establishment during the quarter and the number filled. This is 
the only source of employment data on the organized sector of the economy 
that is available at quarterly intervals. This is, however, subject to several 
limitations. First of all, it excludes the entire agricultural sector, self employed 
persons and part-time workers. In addition, adjustments are to be made to take 
care of non-response in the submission of the returns. Incompleteness of the 
employers’ register is also an impediment. Establishments in the organized 
sector of the economy also submit statutory biennial returns providing the 
occupational distribution of their employees and the educational profile of 
those employed in selected occupations. These returns provide the basis for the 
preparation of biennial reports on the occupational pattern of employment and 
                                                            
 
1  These statutory returns are submitted under the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory 
Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959 and the Rules of 1960 made there under. 


--- Page 87 ---
 
 
87
Social Sectorthe educational profile of selected occupations in the public and private sectors. 
However, non-response in the submission of these returns has over the years 
deteriorated so much that the data on the occupational/education pattern has 
now lost its utility. 
The DGE&T and the DEs in the State Governments and Union Territory 
administrations also provide data on the number of job seekers by age, sex and 
education qualifications, and the socially and physically challenged and their 
distribution by sex and education on the live register of employment 
exchanges, the number of vacancies notified to the employment exchanges 
under the Act referred to in the preceding paragraph and the number of job 
seekers placed in jobs by the employment exchange. It would not at all be fair 
to measure the efficiency of the employment exchanges by comparing the 
number of placements with the number of vacancies notified to the exchanges 
or with the number on the live register for several reasons. First, vacancies 
being filled through public service commissions, other commissions, recruitment 
boards and the like and those filled through competitive examinations need not be 
notified to employment exchanges. Second, public sector undertakings need to 
fill from the Employment Exchanges only vacancies carrying salaries below a 
certain level specified by Government. Finally, establishments in the private 
sector need to only notify their vacancies to the employment exchanges. They 
are not obliged to confine their choice of candidates for recruitment to the 
nominees of the exchanges and are free to fill their vacancies through the open 
market. Sample surveys of those on the live register at any point of time have 
shown that a sizeable proportion of the job seekers are already employed, some 
are unemployed and some have registered at more than one exchange. At the 
same time, surveys of employment and unemployment like the NSSO 
quinquennial surveys (see below) have shown that not all the unemployed are 
registered in the employment exchanges. Thus, the size of the live register can 
overestimate unemployment and, from another angle, can also underestimate 
unemployment. These factors may not also cancel each other and it is, 
therefore, difficult to consider the size of the live register as a reasonably 
accurate estimate of the level of unemployment. Nevertheless, it does represent 
the extent of pressure in the job market, especially for government and public 
sector jobs. 
The second source is the Economic Census. This has been conducted in 1977, 
1980, 1990, 1998, 2003 and 2013 covering all economic enterprises in the country 
except those engaged in crop production and plantation and provides data on 
employment in these enterprises 2. These thus include also the unorganized 
sector outside crop production, animal husbandry and plantations. The third 
source is the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) , which gives us estimates of 
factory sector employment, i.e., all factories registered under the Factories Act, 
1948 and the Bidi and Cigar Workers Condition of Employment Act, 1966 3. 
The ASI presents estimates of levels of employment by industries at the three-
digit level of NIC 2008 codes along with industry level aggregates like 
investment, output, inputs, value added and so on 4 so that one can derive useful 
technical ratios to facilitate analysis of the role of the factors of production in 
                                                            
 
2  The first report on the Economic Census 2013 is available on the website of the Ministry 
of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) www.mospi.gov.in . 
3  See the Sub-section 21.3.3 titled “Factory Sector – Annual Survey of Industries” in Unit 21 
on Agricultural and Industrial Data. 
4  See the list of principal characteristics given in footnote 22 in the section referred to in the 
preceding footnote. Sub-section 21.3.3 referred to therein also gives an idea of the kind of 
data on employment available from ASI. 


--- Page 88 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
88 
industry. The quality of ASI data is thus tied to the completeness of the frame 
of factories, which, in turn depends on the quality of the enforcement of the 
Factories Act, 1948 and the Bidi and Cigar Workers (Conditions of 
Employment) Act, 1966. Data on employment in Railways is available from 
the Railway Board, Ministry of Railways , those on employment in the 
Banking Sector from the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) , those on employment 
in posts and telecommunications respectively by the  Department of Posts and 
the Ministry of Telecommunications  and those on employment in insurance 
by the Ministry of Finance . The reports on the Census of Central 
Government Employees conducted by the DGE&T every year and the 
Census of Central Government Employees conducted by the respective State 
Governments provide a time series data of employment in Government sector. 
The publications 5 of the Labour Bureau (Ministry of Labour), Shimla present 
estimates of average daily number of workers in Government and local fund 
factories and other factories – male and female adults (those who have 
completed 18 years of age), male and female adolescents (those who are aged 
between 15 to 18) and boys and girls (those who are not yet 15 but not below 
14) – and employment in factories by industry groups. These also provide 
estimates of average daily employment in mines and quarries for different 
minerals. The first is based on the statutory returns received from factories 
through the State Governments under the Factories Act, 1948 and the second 
on similar returns received by the Director General of Mines Safety (DGMS) 
under the Mines Act, 1952 as amended in 1983. The third set of data that they 
provide is employment in shops, commercial establishments and restaurants, 
theatres, etc., based on the returns submitted to the State Governments under 
the Shops & Establishments Act and Weekly Holidays Act, 1942. All suffer 
from inadequacy of response in the matter of submitting statutory returns. 
Further, the last one suffers from an added limitation arising from the fact that 
these Acts are in force only in certain urban areas, towns and cantonments. Of 
late, similar returns are being collected by some of the Gram Panchayats, who 
work under the Department of Rural Development of the respective State 
Governments. Lastly, the publications give data on employment in tea, coffee 
and rubber plantations on the basis of data received from the Tea, Coffee and 
Rubber Boards and the Ministry of Agriculture. It must be mentioned here that 
employment in these specific sectors will also be covered by the EMI 
programme to the extent establishments in these sectors are covered by the 
Act governing the EMI programme and the extent to which these 
establishments submit the relevant statutory returns. 
Comprehensive data on employment and unemployment covering the 
entire country at regular intervals  are available from two sources, namely, 
the Population Census conducted by the Office of the Registrar General and 
Census Commissioner, India every ten years and the quinquennial sample 
surveys on employment and unemployment conducted by the National 
Sample Survey Office (NSSO) . The former is based on a complete 
enumeration of the population. Workers in the Census are enumerated as main 
workers and marginal workers. The Census 2011 presents data, at the 
village/urban block level (for slums in all statutory towns also, which have 
been treated as separate enumeration blocks in Census 2011), on the number 
employed (male and female) or the size of the male and female workforce 
                                                            
 
5  Indian Labour Yearbooks (the latest is for 2009 and 2010) and Annual Employment 
Unemployment Survey (the 4 th report of this pertaining to 2012-13 is the latest ) Labour 
Bureau (Ministry of Labour and Employment), Shimla. 


--- Page 89 ---
 
 
89
Social Sector(main workers and marginal workers) and its distribution by four economic 
activity categories – (i) cultivators, (ii) agricultural labourers, (iii) household 
industries and (iv) other activities. The rest of the population, namely, those 
who are neither main workers nor marginal workers, are categorized as non-
workers. All other data on employment and unemployment are available at the 
district level upwards for rural and urban areas and the urban data by urban 
agglomerations and size classes of cities and towns. In Census 2011, till 
December 2014, the following data has been published: 
a) The Primary Census Abstract (PCA), published for each village and urban 
ward, provide, among others, the number of female and male main 
workers, marginal workers and non-workers for overall, SC and ST for 
each of the four-fold classification of economic activity, i.e., cultivators, 
agricultural labourers, household industry and other workers; 
b) The number of female and male main workers, marginal workers and non-
workers in each single year of age, classified further by four-fold 
classification of economic activity and social group disaggregated at India, 
State and district level. 
The kinds of data on employment and unemployment available from the 
Census 2001, and to be published in Census 2011 for rural (R) and urban (U) 
and (R+U) is shown below:6 
a) The distributions of the male and female main workers by economic 
activity (the first digit level of the NIC code) – ten categories of economic 
activities7 and classified further by age groups and educational level (for 
the all India table) and by educational level 8 for the table on India, States 
and Union Territories; 
b) Similar distributions for male and female marginal workers; 
c) Main workers, marginal workers, non workers, those marginal workers 
that are available for or are seeking work (unemployed) and those non- 
workers that are available for or are seeking work (unemployed), by sex, 
social group and educational level; 
                                                            
 
6  Census tables released so far are available on CDs for users on payment of the prices 
indicated in the Census website http://www.census.nic.in. Most of the India and State/UT 
level tables can be viewed in / downloaded from the census website. Highlights of and 
introductions to tables, concepts and definitions and an advance release calendar are also in 
the website. Tables are also available at State/Union Territory/District City level on CDs. 
7  In Census 2001, the NIC 1998 was used for dissemination of the results. In NIC ’98, the first 
level had the following categories: a) Agriculture, Hunting & Forestry, b) Fishing, c) Mining 
& Quarrying, d) Manufacturing, e) Electricity, Gas and Water Supply, f) Construction,  
g) Wholesale and Retail Trade, h) Hotels and Restaurants, i) Transport, Storage and 
Communications, j) Financial Intermediation, k) Real Estates and Business Activities,  
l) Public Administration and Defence, and Compulsory Social Security, m) Education,  
n) Health & Social Work, o) Other Community, Social and Personal Service Activities,  
p) Private Households with Employed Persons, q) Extra-Territorial Organizations and 
Bodies. In Census 2001 tables, Categories A& B were grouped together, J & K were grouped 
together and L to Q were grouped together. 
8  1)Illiterate, 2) literate but below metric, 3) metric/secondary but below graduate, 4) technical 
diploma or certificate not equal to degree, 5) graduate and above other than technical degree, 
and 6) technical degree or diploma equal to degree or post graduate degree and a further sub-
classification of item 6 into engineering and technology, medicine, agriculture and others. 


--- Page 90 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
90 
d) Similar distributions for unemployed SC population, ST populations and 
further classification of the distribution for unemployed general population 
by religious communities; 
e) Distributions of (i) main workers, (ii) marginal workers, and (iii) non- 
workers by main activity, educational levels, age and sex; and 
f) Similar distributions for SC population, ST population, further classification of 
the distribution in item “e” above for the general population by religious 
communities; 
g) The number of main workers, marginal workers and non-workers among 
the disabled by type of disability, age and sex; and 
h) The male and female workforce by detailed economic activities at the 
three or four digit levels, distribution by industrial categories (according to 
National Industrial Classification – 1998 (NIC 1998) and a separate 
table by occupations (as per the National Classification of Occupations – 
1986 (NCO 1968) and educational profile and; 
i) The number of marginal and non-workers who are seeking/available for 
work; 
j) The major non-economic activity of the non-workers, namely, student, 
pensioner, household duties, etc. by age and sex. This category also provide 
information on vulnerable sections of the society like beggars,  etc.  
The NSSO quinquennial surveys on employment and unemployment 
constitute the other major source of data on employment and unemployment. 
The last survey for which results have been published is the 68th Round survey 
conducted during July, 2011 and June, 2012. The earlier surveys related to 
October, 1972 to September, 1973, July, 1977 to June, 1978, January – December, 
1983, July 1987 to June, 1988 July, 1993 to June, 1994, July 1999 – June 2000 and 
July 2004- June 2005. These measure employment/unemployment/labour force 
status on the basis of the Usual Status and Current Status and arrived at four 
measures of employment/unemployment/labour force, namely, the Usual 
Principal Status (UPS), the Usual Principal and Subsidiary Status (UPSS), the 
Current Weekly Status (CWS) and the Current Daily Status (CDS) employment/ 
unemployment/labour force status. These concepts and the measures have been 
discussed in the Unit on “Employment and Unemployment: Policy 
Implications” in Block 1 of MEC – 005  on Indian Economic Policy in your 
first year course. These surveys provide the per thousand distribution of 
variables by characteristics along with estimated number of persons and/or the 
sample number of persons for each column and row characteristic. These can 
be used to estimate new proportions – like for example the worker participation 
rate or the unemployment rate among the poor (those below a certain income 
class) and the non-poor – and also estimates of the magnitude of employment 
or unemployment using the estimated sample proportions and the relevant 
population projection for the midpoint of the survey period. The surveys 9 
                                                            
 
9  Some of the reports relating to employment and unemployment on the 68th round are Report 
No. 554 on “Employment and Unemployment Situation in India” and Report No. 557 
on “Informal Sector and Conditions of Employment in India”. All these can be 
downloaded from the MoSPI website: www.mospi.gov.in by becoming a registered user, 
which is free of charge. 


--- Page 91 ---
 
 
91
Social Sectorprovide the following type of data 10 for Rural (R), Urban (U) and (R+U) at 
national and State levels11: 
a) Distribution of male and female UPS/UPSS/CWS/CDS workforce by 
employment status – self-employed, regular wage/salaried employment 
and casual labour – and by age group, educational level and primary, 
secondary and tertiary economic activity12; 
b) Distribution of UPS/UPSS male and female workforce by economic 
activity up to the three-digit code of NIC; and similar distribution by 
occupation up to the three-digit code of NCO 1968; 
c) Distribution of male and female UPS/UPSS/CWS/CDS workforce by 
employment status and by primary, secondary and tertiary economic 
activity and by MPCE classes; 
d) Distribution of UPS workers in each employment status by usual 
subsidiary economic activities; 
e) Distribution of UPSS employed by place of work (same village/town, 
another village/town) and by distance of the place of work from the place 
of residence; 
f) Proportion of persons who are more or less regularly employed and the 
distribution of persons who are not regularly employed by duration for 
which they are available for work; (underemployment) 
g) Distribution of UPS employed by “CWS employed”, “CWS unemployed”, 
“out of the labour force by the CWS criterion”, showing underemployment 
among the UPS employed; 
h) Similarly distribution of the CWS “employed”, “unemployed,” and “out of 
the labour force” on each half-day of the reference week giving the 
underemployment among the CWS employed; 
i) Distribution person-day of employment by (i) principal 13  economic 
activity of the household, (ii) household type 14, and (iii) household land 
cultivated class, [distribution at (iii) only for rural areas]; 
j) Distribution of households and female-headed households by the number 
of male and female adults (aged 15+) employed under the UPS criterion – 
households with no adult UPS employed, number with one male adult 
UPS employed, number with one female adult employed, number with one 
male adult and one female adult employed and so on; 
                                                            
 
10 The unit record data, that is the basic data collected in the surveyed households, are 
available in CDs from the Computer Centre of the MoSPI on signing an undertaking and 
making a payment. The details can be seen at http://mospi.nic.in/Mospi_New/upload/ 
nsso/ratelist_UnitData.pdf.  
 
11  Technically, data should be available by 70 and odd NSS regions being made up of one or 
more contiguous districts. As the unit record data are available on floppies from NSSO 
on payment, one can make any kind of tabulation for any region or regions. However, one 
should be checking the sample size while preparing such estimates, as that affects the 
reliability of an estimate. 
12  In some cases, only by agricultural sector and the non-agricultural sector. 
13  The economic activity that accounted for the maximum of the income of the household in 
the 365 days preceding the date of the survey. 
14  The nature and type of work from which a household derives its major income is an 
important indicator of the activity pattern of its members. The classification of households 
by household type is based on the major economic activity of the household during the 365 
days preceding the date of the survey. 
