--- Page 29 ---
 
 
29
Macro-Variable Data: 
National Income, Saving 
and Investment
21.4  SAVING 
As you are aware, broadly speaking, GNP is made up of consumption, saving 
exports net of imports, besides net factor income from abroad. Saving is 
important in as much as it goes to finance investment, which in turn brings 
about growth of GNP. What is the volume of Saving relative of GNP? How 
much of it is consumed by the needs of depreciation? Who all contribute, and 
how much, to the total volume of Saving? Let us see what kind of data is 
available on such questions. 
Estimates of Gross Domestic Saving (GDS) and Net Domestic Saving (NDS) 
in current prices and the Rate of Saving are made by CSO and published in the 
National Accounts Statistics (NAS) every year and the Press Note of 
January of every year releasing First Revised Estimates . These are first 
made for any year along with First Revised Estimates of GDP, etc., and revised 
and finalized along with its subsequent revisions. The structure of Savings, that 
is, the distribution of GDS and NDS by type of institution – household sector, 
private corporate sector and public sector are also available in this publication. 
Also presented in this document is the distribution of: 
i) GDS, NDS and consumption of fixed capital (depreciation) by public 
sector, private corporate sector and household sector; 
ii) Public sector GDS, consumption of public sector fixed capital and public 
sector NDS by type of institutions22; 
iii) Public sector GDS – by public authorities [sub-divided further into 
government administration and departmental (commercial) enterprises], 
non-departmental enterprises (broken up further into government 
companies and statutory corporations, the latter including port trusts 
also); 
iv) Private sector GDS, consumption of fixed capital and NDS by private 
corporate sector and household sector; 
v) Private corporate sector GDS by joint stock companies (distributed 
further into financial and non-financial companies) and cooperative banks 
and societies; 
vi) GDS of the household sector into (net) financial saving and saving in 
physical assets and that of (net) financial saving, that is, currency, net 
deposits, shares and debentures, net claim on Government, life insurance 
funds and provident and pension funds; 
vii) Financial assets [in greater detail than in (vi) above] and liabilities of the 
household sector leading to net financial saving of the household sector; 
and 
viii) Item (xiii) in the list in sub-section (a) of Section 20.3.2 – these indicate 
estimates of net saving in these entities. 
NAS 2014 presents the above estimates for 2012-13 and for the period 2004-05 
to 2012-13. The Press Note dated the 31 st January, 2014 of MoSPI releasing 
Quick Estimates provides estimates of GDS, NDS, and all the estimates 
referred to at (i) to (vii) above for 2012-13. Time series of estimates of GDS 
and NDS in current prices are, however, available from 1950-51 onwards. The 
                                                            
 
22 See footnote 12. 


--- Page 30 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
30 
National Income, Saving 
time series on the structure of GDS by institutions (public, private corporate 
and household sectors) are presented in the Pre-Budget Economic Survey 
(2014) of the Ministry of Finance. The Handbook of Statistics on the Indian 
Economy of RBI presents time series data from 1952-53 on GDS and NDS 
and from 1970-71 onwards on (i) their components by institutions, and (ii) 
financial assets and liabilities of the household sector, item-wise, at current 
prices. The EPWRF publication on NAS (fifth edition) gives time series data 
from 1950-51 on all these variables and on Domestic Saving in public sector by 
type of institutions. The CMIE publication referred to earlier also contains time 
series data on GDS and NDS, though for a shorter period of time. 
Estimates of Gross and Net Domestic Saving at the State and Union Territory 
levels are not being made at present by DESs of State/Union Territories. 
The CSO publishes “ Sources and Methods”,  an additional publication 
showing the detailed methodology followed and data sources used for 
preparation of the National Income aggregates in the base year and the 
methodology to be followed since the change in base year. It may be added that 
estimates of Savings suffer from a number of limitations due largely to 
deficiency of data. This is particularly so in respect of estimates of various 
financial instruments from the private corporate sector and the household 
sector. Saving being the excess of income over expenditure, the major gaps in 
data relate to the household sector, non-profit institutions serving households 
(NPISH) and local bodies. Quality of data relating to the private corporate 
sector poses an additional problem. The estimate of Savings of the household 
sector in physical assets is thus derived as a residual, in the absence of direct 
data.23 
21.5  INVESTMENT 
Investment is Capital Formation (CF). Investment of money in the shares of a 
company or purchase of land is not investment but buying a house or 
machinery is investment. In other words, investment is creation of physical 
assets like machinery, equipment, building, inventories and so on, called 
“produced assets”, adding to the capital stock (of such assets) in the economy, 
enhances the productive capacity of the economy. Investment or CF is another 
important component of GNP and the rate of investment – expressed as a 
proportion of GNP – largely determines the rate of growth of the economy. 
How is capital formation financed by the economy? What is the contribution of 
different sectors to capital formation or, how much is used up by different 
sectors? What is the capital stock available in the economy? These are all the 
questions that rise in one’s mind when considering strategies for economic 
growth. What kind of data is available? 
The annual NAS publication of the CSO presents estimates of Gross 
Domestic Capital Formation (GDCF), Gross Domestic Fixed Capital 
Formation (GDFCF), Change in Stocks, Consumption of Fixed Capital (CFC), 
Net Domestic Capital Formation (NDCF) and Net Domestic Fixed Capital 
Formation (NDFCF) in current prices and at constant prices. These estimates 
are made along with First Revised Estimates of National Income in January 
every year and the process of revision of these estimates proceeds along with 
that of the estimates of national income aggregates. The estimates of capital 
formation are presented in the NAS through two alternate approaches, namely, 
                                                             
23Report of the National Statistical Commission, Chapter 13, Section 13.6  


--- Page 31 ---
 
 
31
Macro-Variable Data: 
National Income, Saving 
and Investment
through the flow of funds approach and through the commodity flow approach. 
The flow of funds approach is gross domestic savings plus net capital inflows 
from abroad, while the commodity flow approach, derived by the types of 
assets. The successive issues of NAS and the Press Note of MoSPI of 
January every year also present estimates of the distribution of the following 
aggregates at current and constant prices: 
i) GDCF, GDFCF, Change in Stocks, CFC, NDCF and NDFCF by type of 
institutions (public sector, private corporate sector and household sector); 
ii) GDFCF in the public sector, private corporate sector and household 
sector by type of assets (construction and machinery & equipment); 
iii) GDCF, GDFCF, Change in Stocks, CFC, NDFCF and NDCF by 
economic activity24; 
iv) Net Capital Stock (NCS), Net Fixed Capital Stock (NFCS) and Inventory 
as on the 31 st march of each calendar year by type of institutions 
(Government administrative departments, Departmental enterprises, Non-
departmental enterprises, joint stock companies of the private corporate 
sector, cooperative and household sector); 
v) NCS, NFCS and Inventory as on the 31 st March of each calendar year by 
economic activity; 
vi) Consolidated Account of the Nation – How Capital Formation is financed 
(current prices); 
vii) Consolidated Account of the Nation – External Transactions showing 
current and capital transactions (in current prices); 
viii) GDCF, GDFCF and Change in Stock in the public sector by economic 
activity and type of institutions; 
ix) NDCF, NDFCF and Change in Stock in the public sector by economic 
activity and type of institutions; 
x) GDFCF in each type of public sector institutions by type of assets (at 
current prices); 
xi)  (v) above for the public sector; 
xii) Financing of Capital Formation in (a) Railways, (b) Public Sector 
Communication and (c) Administrative Departments including Departmental 
Enterprises other than (a) and (b), (d) Non-Departmental Financial and 
Non-Financial Enterprises (in current prices); and 
xiii) Time series of GDCF and GFCF from 1951 to latest financial year. 
NAS 2014 presents estimates of aggregates listed above at current and constant 
(2004-05) prices for the period 2004-05 to 2012-13. The MoSPI Press Note of 
the 31st January, 2015 provide estimates of GCF, GFCF and consumption of 
fixed capital in current and constant (2011-12) prices as also of the distribution 
of these by industry of use and by institutional sectors of the economy, as 
defined in the SNA, namely, Public non-financial corporations, private non-
financial corporations, public financial corporations, private financial corporations, 
general Government and Households for the period 2011-12 to 2013-14. 
 
                                                            
 
24 See footnote 10. 


--- Page 32 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
32 
National Income, Saving 
Other publications providing time series of CSO data on capital formation are: 
Sl. 
No. 
Publication  Variable Time Series 
From 
1) Pre-Budget Economic 
Survey (2006) 
 #GDCF, GFCF and 
Change in Stocks and their 
structure by by institutions 
1950-51 
2) RBI Handbook of 
Statistics on the Indian 
Economy – 2005 
*i) GDCF and NDCF 1950-51 
  *ii) GDCF, GFCF and Change 
in Stocks and their 
structure by institutions. 
1970-71 
  #iii) Financial assets and 
liabilities of the household 
sector (item-wise) 
1970-71 
3) EPWRF publication 
on NAS (Fifth 
Edition) 
*i) data of the type in items (i) 
to (ix) and (xi) of NAS 
listed in the preceding 
paragraph of this section 
are generally given. 
1950-51 
  *ii) Capital-output ratios by 
institutions; 
1950-51 
  *iii) Average NFCS to Output 1950-51 
4) CMIE  *GDCF and GFCF 1960-61 
# at current prices   *at current and constant (1993-94) prices 
The publications/documents of CSO and other documents like the Report of 
the National Statistical Commission referred to in the section on National 
Income contain the methodology and the data utilized for preparing estimates 
of Capital Formation and related aggregates also. 
Estimates of GFCF at the State level are being prepared by 14 States, namely, 
Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Meghalaya, 
Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Gujarat 
and Rajasthan. The status of these estimates are indicated in the EPWRF 
publication on NAS, referred to in the sub-section 20.3.4. 
Gaps in data for the estimation of capital formation exist in a number of 
relevant areas25. Some of these are: 
i) Non-availability of regular data on equipment and machinery (part of 
GFCF) in domestic production in unregistered manufacturing; 
ii) Lack of annual enterprise surveys and surveys on NPISHs for estimating 
GFCF by institutional sectors of the economy; 
iii) Complete accounts of local bodies are not available for some States/ UTs; 
iv) Bank advances and other indirect approaches form the basis of estimation 
of Changes in Stocks, with benchmark estimates coming from 
quinquennial enterprise surveys; and 
                                                            
 
25Report of the National Statistical Commission, Chapter 13, Section 13.6. 


--- Page 33 ---
 
 
33
Macro-Variable Data: 
National Income, Saving 
and Investment
 
v) Inadequacies in (a) the representative character of the sample of 
companies and (b) the blow-up factor used for estimation of saving and 
investment of the private corporate sector. 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) What approaches are followed by CSO to compile the saving data in 
National Accounts Statistics? Which estimates of investment are prepared 
by the CSO? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
2) Go through the methodology contained in NAS 2015 and the data utilized 
for preparing estimates of capital formation and related aggregates. 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
3) From where can you get the data on contribution of different sectors to 
capital formation? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
21.6  LET US SUM UP 
The Indian Statistical System with the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (MoSPI) at its apex collects, compiles and disseminates an 
enormous amount of data on diverse aspects of the Indian economy, to the 
extent feasible, international standards prescribed by the United Nations and 
other international bodies. MoSPI sets standards to be followed by statistical 
agencies in the country and coordinates statistical activities carried out by these 
agencies. It also developes standardized classification of economic activities, 
namely, NIC, revising it from time to time keeping pace with the structural 
changes taking place in the economy. Data published by various Government 
agencies can be accessed through the portal www.data.gov.in . Other agencies 
also bring together and publish comprehensive data on some or all sectors of 
the economy, these publications being, the annual Economic Survey of the 
Ministry of Finance, the Budget documents, the Five-Year Plan documents, 
RBI’s Statistical Handbook on the Indian Economy,  its monthly bulletin, 
the website on the database of the Indian Economy,  and the Human 
Development Reports prepared by the Planning Commission and the State 
Governments. Most of these data are available in electronic format – and/or on 


--- Page 34 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
34 
National Income, Saving 
the websites of the agencies concerned. One can usually download the 
published reports of the Government agencies from their respective websites 
free-of-charge. Various agencies also give anonymized data for analysis 
purposes. The CMIE (EIU), Mumbai and the EPWRF, Mumbai also bring 
together and publish comprehensive data on different sectors/aspects of the 
economy regularly. The Statistical Handbooks of the State/Union Territory 
DES and the District Census Handbooks published by the Census 
Directorates/Registrar general of India provide comprehensive information 
across sectors at the State and sub-State levels. Finally, the website of the 
United Nations Statistics Division provide access to methodological 
documents, data and report of various UN organisations which can be used for 
cross-country comparisons. The search for any kind of data can thus very well 
start from one of these sources and move on, if necessary, to the primary 
source. 
National Accounts Statistics (NAS) , which consists of estimates of National 
Income (NNI), GNI, GDP, NDP and related macroeconomic aggregates like 
Consumption Expenditure, Personal Disposable Income and Factor Incomes 
constitute an important tool for analyzing the performance of an economy. 
These compiled by CSO, MoSPIand published every year. In compiling these, 
CSO follows the guidelines given in 1993 SNA of the United Nations to the 
extent feasible. These estimates are published in great detail in CSO’s annual 
publication National Accounts Statistics (NAS) . The latest issue of this 
publication – NAS 2014 – is also available on the MoSPI website. In addition, 
Advance Estimates of GNI, GDP, NNI and per capita income for a financial 
year are released two months before the end of the financial year through a 
Press Note and in the MoSPI website . First Revised Estimates of these 
aggregates relating to a financial year and revised estimates of earlier years are 
released by January of the next year, that is, within ten months after the close 
of the financial year through a Press Note and on the MoSPI website. Quartly 
Estimates of GDP are also prepared and released, generally within 45 days 
from the close of a quarter.  
NAS estimates are presented in current and constant (base year) prices. CSO 
changes the base year from time to time to take note of structural changes in 
the economy and to depict a true picture of the economy. The base year was 
changed to 2004-05 in January, 2010 and to 2011-12 in January, 2015. Thus, as 
of the 1 st March, 2015, Advance Estimates of GDP, etc., for 2014-15, First 
Revised Estimates of GDP, etc., for 2013-14, estimates of GDP for the quarter 
ending December, 2014 and for the period April-December, 2014, all in current 
and constant (2011-12) prices, have been released. 
Estimates of Saving and Capital Formation form part of the National Accounts 
Statistics. These estimates are presented in detail in the publication National 
Accounts Statistics, published in May of each year . The press note of 
January, 2015, has provided the estimates referred to above with a changed 
base year 2011-12. The detailed estimates presented in NAS enable an analysis 
of various aspects of Saving and Capital Formation like the structure of Saving 
and Capital Formation, the manner in which Capital Formation is financed, the 
role of the public sector in Capital Formation and trends in the rate of Saving 
and Capital Formation and net capital flow from abroad. 
Estimates of State Income are made and released by DES of all States and 
Union Territories except Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and 
Lakshadweep. Estimates of GFCF are being made by 14 state DESs. District 


--- Page 35 ---
 
 
35
Macro-Variable Data: 
National Income, Saving 
and Investment
Income estimates are made and released by DES of States. Estimates of State 
Income are also available in MoSPI website, besides the Economics Survey, 
RBI Statistical Handbook on the Indian Economy and the CMIE and 
EPWRF (State Income) publications referred to earlier. The last publication 
also give the State level GFCF estimates. The RBI Handbook, the Economic 
Survey, the EPWRF publication on NAS and the CMIE publication referred 
to earlier also present the national level estimates of GDP, etc., estimates of 
Saving and Capital Formation made by CSO. The CMIE and the EPWRF 
publications also contain almost as much detail as the publication NAS and in a 
time series format. 
We have also noted the limitations and inadequacies to which estimates of 
national and state income and those of capital formation and saving are subject. 
Improvement in methodology and efforts to fill gaps in data constitute a 
continuous process. 
21.7 EXERCISES 
1) What type of data will you need to assess the performance of Indian 
Economy? Explain the various sources of such data? 
2) State the difference between “Gross” and “Net” in the context of domestic 
and national income. How can one arrive at “Net National Income” from 
“Gross Value Added at basic prices”? 
3) What are the relationships depicted in Input-Output Table? How are these 
tables useful in research work? 
4) With the help of NAS 2014, explain the structure of saving in India. 
5) What do you mean by the term capital formation? What is the capital stock 
available in India? 
21.8  SOME USEFUL BOOKS  
Central Statistics Office (2012): National Income Statistics  – Sources and 
Methods, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Government 
of India, New Delhi. 
_________(2008): Methods of estimating State and District Domestic Product. 
_________(2014): National Accounts Statistics, 2014, 
_________(2007): Input Output Transactions Table2007-08 
_________(2015): Press Note New Series estimates of national income, 
consumption expenditure, saving and capital formation (base year 2011-12) 
International Labour Organisation (ILO) (1993) : Resolution Concerning 
Statistics of Employment in the Informal Sector, 15thInternational Conference 
of Labour Statisticians (ICLS), January, 1993. Geneva. 
Indian Association for Research in National Income and Wealth & 
Institute of Economic Growth (1998): Golden Jubilee Seminar on Data Base 
of the Indian Economy, Delhi. A look at the Bulletins of the Association would 
also be useful. 
http://mospi.gov..in : website of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation, Govt. of India. 
http://rbi.org.in : website of the Reserve Bank of India. 


--- Page 36 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
36 
National Income, Saving 
http://unstats.un.org : website of the United Nation’s Statistics Division. 
Katyal, R.P., Sardana, M.G. and Satyanarayana, J. (2001): Estimates of 
DDP, Discussion Paper 2, National Workshop on State HDRs and the 
Estimation of District Income Poverty Under the State HDR Project Executed 
by the Planning Commission (GOI) with UNDP Support held in Bangalore in 
July, 2001, UNDP, New Delhi. 
Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation (2001): Report of the 
National Statistical Commission, Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation, New Delhi. 
System of National Accounts 1993 (SNA 1993) Commission of the European 
Communities, International Monetary Fund, Organisation for Economic 
Cooperation and Development United Nations, World Bank, Brussels/ 
Luxembourg, New York, Paris, Washington, D.C. www.mospi.nic.in : 
Website of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
21.9 ANSWERS ON HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) Coordination of statistical activities in the country maintenance of 
statistical norms and standards, providing liaison with control, state and 
international statistical agencies. 
2) See Section 21.2 
3) See Section 21.2 
4) See Section 21.2 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) The data like estimates of national income and related macro economic 
aggregates (for example Personal Disposable Incomes, Saving, Consumption, 
Capital Formation etc.) which provide a comprehensive view of the 
internal and external transactions of the economy over a period form the 
system of National Accounts. 
2) 1948-49, 1960-61, 1970-71, 1980-81, 1993-94, 1999-2000. 
3) RBI – The Handbook of Statistics on the Indian Economy, CMIE – 
National Income Statistics, EPWRF publication on NAS and SDP etc. 
4) Directorates of Statistics and Economics. 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) See Section 21.4 
2) The annual document of NAS published by CSO. 
3) See Section 21.5 


--- Page 37 ---
 
 
 
37
Agricultural and 
Industrial DataUNIT 22 AGRICULTURAL AND 
INDUSTRIAL DATA 
Structure 
22.0 Objectives 
22.1 Introduction 
22.2 Agricultural Data 
 22.2.1 Agricultural Census 
 22.2.2 Studies on Cost of Cultivation 
 22.2.3 Annual Estimates of Crop Production 
 22.2.4 Livestock Census 
 22.2.5 Data on Production of Major Livestock Products 
 22.2.6 Agricultural Statistics at a Glance (ASG) 
 22.2.7 Another Source of Data on Irrigation 
 22.2.8 Other Data on the Agricultural Sector 
22.3 Industrial Data 
 22.3.1 Data Sources Covering the Entire Industrial Sector 
 22.3.2 Factory Sector – Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) 
 22.3.3 Monthly Production of Selected Industries and Index of Industrial Production (IIP) 
 22.3.4 Data on Unorganised Industrial Sector 
 22.3.5 Industrial Credit and Finance 
 22.3.6 Contribution of Industrial Sector to GDP 
22.4 Let Us Sum Up 
22.5 Exercises 
22.6 Some Useful Books 
22.7 Answer or Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
22.0  OBJECTIVES  
After going through this Unit, you will be able to: 
• know the kind of agricultural data available; 
• explain the different sources of agricultural data and different data 
generating agencies; 
• describe the characteristics of multivariable industrial data; and 
• know how to access the different types of agricultural and industrial data. 
22.1  INTROCUTION  
In the previous unit, we have looked at data on macro variables like National 
Income, Saving and Investment, which tell us about the dimension and broad 
structure of the economy and the direction in which the economy is moving. 
 
