--- Page 70 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
70 
2) What is the existing base year for constructing unit value Index and 
quantum index by DGCI&S? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
3) What are the reasons for divergence between two sources of trade data? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
4) List the various transactions covered in the ‘net invisibles’. 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
23.3 FINANCE  
The finance sector consists of public finances, the central bank or the Reserve 
Bank of India, the scheduled banks, urban and rural cooperative banks and 
related institutions. The financial market consists of the stock exchanges 
dealing with scripts like shares, bonds and other debt instrument, the primary 
and secondary markets, the foreign exchange market, the treasury bills market 
and the securities market where financial institutions, mutual funds, foreign 
institutional investors, market intermediaries, the market regulator the 
Securities Exchange Board of India (SEBI), the banking sector and the RBI all 
play important roles.  It also has the insurance (life and general) and pension 
funds as well as their respective regulators, i.e., the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority (IRDA) and the Pension Funds Regulatory and 
Development Authority (PFRDA). It has the holding companies, which invest 
in various subsidiaries and controls its operations through its stocks 11. There is 
also the unorganized sector made up of financial operators like individual 
money-lenders and pawn shops, insurance agents, unregistered stock brokers/ 
                                                            
 
11  One example of a Holding Company is Tata Sons, whose subsidiaries include TISCO, TCS, 
Tata Motors, Tata Housing, etc. 


--- Page 71 ---
 
 
71
Trade and Finance sub-brokers, etc. In the System of National Accounts, 2008 (SNA 2008) 12, the 
financial sector has been sub-divided into nine sub-sectors, depending on its 
type of business. 
23.3.1 Public Finances 
What would we like to know about public finances? We would like to know 
how they are managed. What are the sources of such finances and how and on 
what are they spent? Does the Government restrict its expenditure within its 
means or does it spend beyond the resources available to it? Does it, in the 
process, borrow heavily to finance its expenditure? The Budget documents of 
the Central and State Governments, the pre-Budget Economic Survey of the 
ministry of finance and the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Handbook of 
Statistics on the Indian Economy 2005 and the Monthly Bulletin of the RBI 
provide a variety of data on public finances. The National Accounts Statistics 
of the CSO, MoSPI also provides the output, GVA, gross savings, etc. of the 
financial sector and its various sub-sectors. EPWRF website will also help to 
access data in a time series format on public finances.The Economic Survey, 
for instance, gives an overall summary of the budgetary transactions of the 
Central and State governments and Union Territory Administrators. This 
includes the internal and extra-budgetary resources of the public sector 
undertakings for their plans. It indicates the total outlay, the current revenues, 
the gap between the two, the manner in which the gap is financed by net 
internal and external capital receipts and finally, the overall budgetary deficit. 
It gives the break-up of the outlay into developmental and non-developmental 
outlays and the components of the latter, the components of current revenues-
tax revenue and non-tax revenue – and sub-components of these and the 
components of internal and external capital receipts. The RBI Handbook 
2013-14 presents the following time series data in respect of public finances. 
a) Central Government Finances 
i) Key deficit indicators 13 of the Central Government – gross fiscal 
deficit, gross primary deficit, net primary deficit, revenue deficit, 
primary revenue deficit, drawdown of cash balances, net RBI credit 
from 1975-76 onwards; 
ii) Major components of Central Govt. Receipts – tax revenue (direct and 
indirect taxes and their components) non-tax revenue (one of its 
important components is interest receipts) and capital receipts; 
                                                            
 
12  Discussed in Unit 20 in the discussion on National Accounts Statistics. 
13  GFD  = total expenditure including loans (net of recovery) – revenue receipts (including 
external grants and non-debt capital receipts); NFD = GFD – net lending of the Central 
Govt; GPD = GFD – interest payment; NPD = net interest payments; RD = revenue 
receipts – revenue expenditure; PRD = RD – interest payment; BD (Conventional Deficit) 
= all expenditure (revenue and capital) – all receipts (revenue and capital); with the 
discontinuation of ad hoc treasury bills and 91-day treasury bills, the concept of 
conventional budget deficit has lost its relevance since 1/4/97. The figures shown against 
BD from 1997-98, therefore, represent draw down of cash balances from RBI; Net RBI 
Credit to Govt.  = the sum of variations in the RBI’s holdings of (i) Central Govt. dated 
securities, (ii) treasury bills, (iii) Rupee coins, and (iv) loans and advances from RBI to the 
Central Govt. since 1/4/97 adjusted for changes in the Central Govt.’s cash balances with 
the RBI in the case of the Centre.  


--- Page 72 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
72 
iii) Major14 heads of capital receipts of the Central Government – market 
borrowings, small savings, provident funds15, special deposits, recoveries 
of loans, disinvestments receipts16, external loans (net);  
iv) Major heads of Central Govt. expenditure – revenue expenditure and 
its important components (defence, interest payments and subsidies), 
capital expenditure including loans and advances and defence 
expenditure; also the breakup of expenditure into developmental and 
non-developmental heads and the shares of economic services and 
social services in developmental expenditure; 
v) Centre’s gross fiscal deficit and its financing – GFD receipts, GFD 
expenditure, Gross Fiscal Deficit, financing of GFD through external 
financing and internal financing (market borrowings, other borrowings, 
draw down of cash balances); 
vi) Gross capital formation from budgetary resources of the Central 
Government – fixed assets, work stores, increase in stocks of foodgrains 
& fertilisers, gross financial assistance for capital formation to State 
Governments, Non-Departmental Commercial Undertakings (NDCUs)17 
and others; 
vii) Public sector Plan outlay, its sectoral profile and the manner in which 
it is financed – from sources like own resources, domestic market 
borrowings and net capital inflow from abroad; 
viii) Financing of Public Sector Plan – balance from current revenue, 
contribution of public enterprises, borrowings (including long and 
medium term borrowings), small savings, deficit financing, net capital 
inflow from abroad, central assistance and others. 
b) Finances of the State Governments 
i) Key deficit indicators of the State Governments – fiscal deficit, gross 
primary deficit, revenue deficit, primary revenue deficit, overall deficit, 
net RBI credit to States (annual variation) from 1975-76 onwards; 
ii) Pattern of receipts of the State Government – total Revenue receipts: 
tax receipts (like sales tax and State excise duties), the share of Central 
taxes like income tax and union excise duties; and non-tax receipts like 
interest receipts, grants from the Centre, total capital receipts; 
iii) Pattern of major capital receipts of the State Government – loans from 
centre, recovery of loans and advances, market loans, State provident 
fund (net), special securities issued to NSSF; 
iv) Expenditure pattern – revenue and capital expenditure; capital outlay, 
loans and advances by State Government, developmental expenditure 
and the shares of economic services and social services in it and non-
developmental expenditure and the shares of interest payments, 
administrative services and pension and miscellaneous general 
services; 
                                                            
 
14  Adjusted for changes in classification effected in 1974-75 and 1987-88. 
15  Only Govt. provident funds, as the Public Provident Fund (PPF) is part of small savings 
since 1998-99. 
16  These are not to be treated as budgetary receipts as these are to be credited to a separate 
fund. 
17 NDCU means the Central and State Public Sector Units 


--- Page 73 ---
 
 
73
Trade and Finance v) States’ Gross Fiscal Deficit and its financing – loans from Central 
Government, market borrowings, special securities issued to NSSF and 
others, 
vi) Outstanding liabilities of the State Governments. 
c) Combined Finances of Central and State Governments 
i) Combined deficit; 
ii) Receipts and Disbursements; 
iii) Direct and Indirect tax revenues; 
iv) Developmental and non-developmental expenditure; 
v) Market borrowings; 
vi) Interest rates on dated securities (Range and weighted averages) of 
Central and State Government; 
vii) Outstanding liabilities; 
viii) Ownership of Central and State Govt Securities – 11 categories like 
RBI, scheduled commercial banks, cooperative banks, primary 
dealers, insurance companies, financial institutions, mutual funds, 
provident funds, corporates, foreign institutional investors and others; 
d) Transactions with the Rest of the World 
We have enumerated the kind of data available on Central and State 
Government finances. But these relate mainly to domestic finances and 
transactions. What about our transactions with the rest of the world? We 
have looked at one of these, namely, trade in merchandise and services in 
the section on trade. There are a number of other areas in which India 
interacts with the rest of the world. Foreign exchange flows into the country 
as a result of exports from India, external assistance/aid/loans/borrowings, 
returns from Indian investments abroad, remittance and deposits from Non-
Resident Indians (NRI) and foreign investment (foreign direct investment – 
FDI – and portfolio investment) in India. Foreign exchange reserves are 
used up for purposes like financing imports, retiring foreign debts and 
investment abroad. What is the net result of these transactions on the 
foreign exchange reserves? What are the trends in these flows and their 
components? What is the size of the current account imbalance relative to 
GDP and its composition? If it is a deficit is it investment-driven? What is 
the size of foreign exchange reserves relative to macro-aggregates like 
GDP, the size of imports and the size of the short-term external debt 18?  
                                                             
18  One can measure the size of the forex reserves as equivalent to so many weeks or months of 
imports. Alternatively, one can relate it to financial stability. The Guidotti-Greenspan Rule 
sets a standard for this. According to this rule, reserves should equal one year’s short-term 
debt. Yet another way of examining the size of the reserves is to look at it is terms of its 
opportunity cost. The reserves earn a zero real return measured in domestic terms. If on the 
other hand, these are invested either domestically in infrastructure or in a fully diversified 
long-term way in global markets, substantial incremental benefits would accrue to the 
domestic economy. [see the Hindu, April 3, 2006, page 17 “Intriguing Pattern of Global 
Capital Flows” excepts from the L.K. Jha Memorial Lecture delivered recently 
(March 24, 2006) in Mumbai by Prof. Lawrence Summers. President of Harvard 
University and former Secretary of the Treasury in the Clinton Administration, at the 
invitation of the RBI.] The full text of the lecture may also be published in the RBI 
Monthly Bulletin. The lecture discusses the implications of the rising forex reserves of the 
developing countries and the opportunities and challenges that these present.  


--- Page 74 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
74 
The RBI Handbook 2013-14 gives time series data (which are often in 
US$ as well as in Indian Rupees) on a number of these parameters: 
i) India’s overall BoP showing current account and capital account and key 
components of these like trade balance, invisible 19, types of foreign 
investment, net external assistance, net commercial borrowing, rupee debt 
service and net NRI deposits. It also shows monetary movements in terms 
of increase/decrease in forex/reserves, IMF and SDR allocation, 
ii) Exchange rate of Indian Rupee vis-à-vis US $, UK £, DM/ € and Japanese 
¥ from 1975 onwards (calendar year – annual average, financial year – 
annual average and end year rates), 
iii) Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER) and Nominal Effective Exchange 
Rate (NEER) of Indian Rupee based on 36 country bilateral weights with 
base 2004-05 from calendar year 2005 onwards, 
iv) Indices of REER and NEER, 
v) External assistance in the form of loans and grants from 1985-86 onwards 
(in US $ and Indian Rupees), authorization, utilization and debt service 
payments, 
vi) NRI deposits outstanding (in US $ and Indian Rupees) from 1996 
onwards in different types of accounts like NR (E)RA, FCNR(A), 
FCNR(B), NR(NR)RD, NRO, FC (B&O)D, FC(O)N and total. It has 
increased from US $17.446 billion in 1996 to US $103.844 in 2014, 
vii) Foreign investment inflows (in US $ and Indian Rupees) namely, gross 
investments, repatriation/ disinvestment, FDI by India, net foreign direct 
investment, net portfolio investment from 2000-01 onwards, 
viii) Foreign exchange reserves (in US $ and Indian Rupees) from 1956-57 
onwards, 
ix) India’s external debt (in US $ and Indian Rupees) from 1996 onwards 20, 
which, inter alia, provides concessional debt as percentage of total debt, 
short term debt as % to total debt, debt stock-GDP ratio (%) and debt 
service ratio (%). 
FDI has assumed importance in the context of the country’s efforts to meet the 
increasing need for investment capital for its expanding economy. Data on FDI 
are important. These are available from August, 1991 onwards. FDI data 
collected by RBI and the Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion 
(DIPP) in the Ministry of Commerce & Industry before 2000 related only to 
equity capital. The coverage of the data has since then has been expanded so 
that these are in accordance with the best international practices. FDI data 
collected by RBI now cover (a) equity capital, (b) reinvested earnings (retained 
earnings of FDI companies); and (c) other capital (inter-corporate debt 
transaction between related entities). FDI data from 2000-01 onwards are, 
therefore, not comparable with data of earlier years. The Department of 
                                                            
 
19  The component transactions that make up ‘invisible’ have been enumerated in the section 
on Trade – Services. 
20  The debts are classified into I. Multilateral, II. Bilateral, III. International Monetary Fund, 
IV. Trade credit, V. Commercial borrowing, VI. NRI & FC (B&O) deposits, VII. Rupee 
debt, VIII. Total long-term debt, IX. Short-term debt and X. Gross total debt. Most of the 
groups have sub-groups A. Government borrowing, and B. Non-Government borrowing, 
further disaggregated into concessional and non-concessional borrowing. 


--- Page 75 ---
 
 
75
Trade and Finance Industrial Policy and Promotion of the Ministry of Commerce and Industries 
publishes monthly data on FDI inflow in India 21. It presents time series data on 
the break-up of FDI flows by 
1) Cumulative FDI inflows (equity inflows + reinvested earnings + other 
capital) from 2000 – 2014, 
2) Cumulative amount of FDI equity inflows (excluding amount remitted 
through RBI’s + NRI schemes), 
3) FDI inflows during the financial year till that month, 
4) FDI equity inflows (month-wise) during that financial year and that 
calendar year, 
5) Share of top investing countries FDI equity inflows, 
6) Sectors attracting highest FDI equity inflows, showing 10 different areas, 
like service sector, construction development, telecommunication, 
computer software and hardware, drugs and pharmaceuticals, automobile 
industry, chemicals (other than fertilisers), power, metallurgical industries, 
hotel and tourism, 
7) Statement of RBI’s regional offices (with State covered) received FDI 
equity inflows, 
8) Country-wise FDI equity inflows from April 2000 onwards (from 140 
countries, FIIs, NRI), 
9) Sector-wise FDI equity inflows from April 2000 onwards (showing 63 
industrial sectors). 
The RBI handbook 2013-14 and the SEBI Handbook of Statistics of Indian 
Securities Market22 present time series on FII. The SEBI handbook, gives 
i) Foreign Investment Inflows, 
ii) Trends in FII to portfolio investment, 
iii) Trends in resource mobilization by mutual funds, 
iv) International Securities Market (market capitalization, no. of listed 
companies, value of shares traded, no. of trading days,  
v) International Fixed Income Market (no. of bonds listed, value. of bonds 
listed, value of bonds traded), 
vi) International Derivatives market (stock options, stock futures, stock index 
options, stock index futures). 
FDI data can also be accessed in the RBI website www.rbi.org.in. 
  
                                                            
 
21  You can visit the site 
http://dipp.gov.in/English/Publications/FDI_Statistics/FDI_Statistics.aspx#MainContent to 
get the monthly FDI inflow. 
22  http://www.sebi.gov.in/sebiweb/home/list/4/32/0/0/Handbook%20of%20Statistics 


--- Page 76 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
76 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) Name the documents that provide different kinds of data on public finances. 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
2) What is the difference between Gross Fiscal Deficit (GFD) and Net Fiscal 
Deficit (NFD)? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
3) Identify the transactions other than trade in merchandise that India has 
with the rest of world. 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
23.3.2 Currency, Coinage, Money and Banking 
Economic transactions need a medium of exchange. We have come a long way 
from the days of barter and come to the use of money and equivalent financial 
instruments as the medium of exchange. Banks function as important financial 
intermediaries not only in this process but also in matters of resource 
mobilization and the deployment of such resources. The central bank of the 
country (the RBI in India) regulates the functioning of banking system. In 
addition, it issues currency notes and takes steps to regulate the money supply 
in the economy in order to achieve the objectives of ensuring adequate credit to 
development activities and at the same time to maintain stability in prices. We 
should, therefore, be interested in data on money supply or the stock of money 
and its structure and the factors that bring about changes in these, the kind of 
aggregate that need monitoring, the transactions in the banking system in 
pursuance of the nation’s development objectives, the flow of credit to 
different activities, indicators of the health and efficiency of banks which are 
the custodians of the savings of the public. We should also be interested in data 
on prices as price level affects the purchasing power of money and indices of 


--- Page 77 ---
 
 
77
Trade and Finance prices appropriate for the purpose/group in question – consumer prices for 
producers and different groups of consumers. 
Most of these of data are compiled by the RBI on the basis of its records and 
those of NABARD and returns that it receives from banks and can be found in 
RBI Bulletins and RBI handbook . The wholesale Price Index (WPI) is 
compiled by the Economic Advisor’s Officer in the Ministry of Industry, the 
Consumer Price Index for Industrial Workers (CPI – IW) and CPI for 
Agricultural Labour (CPI -  AL) by the Labour Bureau, Shimla, Ministry of 
Labour and CPI for rural and urban (CPI – Rural, CPI-Urban and CPI 
Rural+Urban) by the CSO. All these are published by the agencies concerned 
and also presented in the RBI and CSO publications mentioned above. The 
Consumer Price Index released on 12 th of each month by the CSO also 
provides retail prices of selected commodities/services, separately for the rural 
and urban areas in India. Two other reports of the Reserve Bank of India 
published every year – the Report on Currency and Finance and the Report 
on Trends in Banking provide a wealth of information of use to analyse. The 
RBI also maintains an online database in searchable format, where one can 
select the parameters for which one need to use the data. You can also right 
click on the selected page, copy the data necessary for your analysis and paste 
it on a blank excel workbook to carry out your own analysis 23. The EPWRF 
website also provides data on Banking, Money and Finance. 
The RBI Handbook 2013-14 presents time series data on 
i) Liabilities and assets of the RBI, 1980 onwards. The liabilities are deposits 
from Central Government, State Governments, Scheduled Commercial 
Banks, Scheduled State Co-operative Banks, Non-Scheduled Co-operative 
Banks, other Banks and others. The assets are notes and coins, balances 
held abroad, loans and advances to Central and State Govts. banks and 
other agencies,  bills purchased and discounted, investments and other 
assets; 
ii) Components of money stock, namely, Reserve Money (M 0) made up of 
currency in circulation, other deposits with RBI and bankers’ deposits with 
RBI, currency with the public (= currency in circulation – cash with bank), 
Narrow Money (M1) consisting of currency with the public, other deposits 
with RBI and demand deposits and Broad Money (M3) comprising Narrow 
Money and time deposits; 
iii) Sources of money stock consisting of net RBI credit to Central Government, 
net RBI credit to State Government, other banks’ investments in Government 
securities, RBI credit to commercial sector, Other banks’ credit to 
commercial sector, net foreign exchange assets of the RBI, net foreign 
exchange assets of other banks, Government’s currency liabilities to 
public, net non-monetary liabilities of RBI, net non-monetary liabilities of 
other banks, RBI’s gross claims on banks;  
iv) Average monetary aggregates, like currency with the public, demand 
deposits, time deposits, other deposits with the RBI, reserve money, 
narrow money, broad money, net bank credit to Government, bank credit 
to governmental sector, net foreign exchange assets of the banking sector, 
                                                            
 
23 See the link http://dbie.rbi.org.in/DBIE/dbie.rbi?site=home 


--- Page 78 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
78 
Government’s currency liabilities to the public, banking sector’s net non-
monetary liabilities; 
v) Major monetary policy rates and reserve requirements: bank rate, LAF 
(REPO, reverse REPO, and MSF) rates, CRR and SLR; 
vi) Monthly data series on the detailed composition of each of the components 
of the money stock (the “C” components) and the composition of 
individual sources of change in the money stock; also defining new 
monetary aggregates 24 NM 2 and NM 3, these being respectively equal to 
“M1 + short-term time deposits” and “[NM 2+ long-term deposits + 
call/term funding from Financial Institutions (FIs)] = [domestic credit + 
Government’s currency liability to the public + net forex assets of the 
banking sector – capital account – other items (net)]; 
vii) Monthly data series on Liquidity Aggregates 25, namely, L1= NM3 + Postal 
deposits26; L 2 = L 1 + liabilities 27 of FIs; L 3 = L 2 + public deposits with 
NBFCs28 (L3 is compiled on a quarterly basis); 
viii) Monthly average price of gold and silver in domestic (Mumbai) and 
foreign markets; 
ix) Selected Aggregates of Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) like 
outstanding demand and time deposits, investment in Govt. and other 
securities, bank credit (food and non-food), cash in hand and balance with 
the RBI. 
x) Deployment of non-food credit to priority sector and its sub-sectors (like 
agriculture, small scale industries), industry and its groups, whole sale 
trade and export credit; and short and long term direct and indirect 
institutional credit to agriculture and allied activities and to farmers by size 
of holdings; 
xi) Consolidated balance sheets of SCBs; Gross and net Non-Performing 
Assets (NPAs) of SCBs by bank groups 29; Distribution of SCBs and 
different sub-group of SCBs by Capital to Risk-weighted Assets Ratio 
(CRAR);30 and 
xii) Important banking indicators of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs), State 
Cooperative Banks, Primary Agricultural Coop. Societies (PACS), State 
Coop. Agricultural and Rural Development Banks and Primary Coop. 
(A&RD) Banks; 
                                                            
 
24 See footnote 19. 
25  The methodology for compiling liquidity aggregates is available in the “New Monetary and 
Liquidity Aggregates” in the RBI Bulletin of November, 2000. The acronyms NM2and NM3 
are used to distinguish the new monetary aggregates from the existing monetary aggregates. 
26  Post office SB deposits + PO time deposits + PO recurring deposits + other deposits + PO 
Cumulative Time Deposits. 
27  Term money borrowings + CDs + term deposits. 
28  Non-Banking Financial Companies. Estimates of public deposits are generated on the basis 
of a sample study of more than 1000 NBFCs with public deposits of Rs. 20 crores or more. 
29 1) public sector banks, 2) old private sector banks, 3) new private sector banks, and 4) 
foreign banks in India. 
30  The detailed instructions issued by the RBI on CAR (Capital Adequacy Ratio) or CRAR 
can be seen at http://rbi.org.in/scripts/BS_ViewMasCirculardetails.aspx?Id=8133&Mode=0. 
SCBs had to comply with a minimum CRAR of 8 per cent up to the end of March, 1999 and 
9 per cent from the end of March, 2000. The sub-group 1 in the footnote 25 is split into two 
sub-groups – SBI group and nationalized banks. 


--- Page 79 ---
 
 
79
Trade and Finance 23.3.2 Financial Markets 
What would we like to know about the financial market and its functioning? 
We should like to know about the ways in which financial resources can be 
accessed and at what cost. What are the prevailing interest rates payable for 
funds to meet short-term or long-term requirements? How do new ventures 
access the large amount of resources that are need for the new ventures? How 
do term lending institutions access funds required for their operations? What 
are the sources of funds? 
The RBI, which regulates banking operations and the operations of the NBFCs 
and FIs and the Securities Exchange Board of India (SEBI), which regulates 
the capital market, and the Department of Company Affairs that administers 
the Companies Act, are the major sources of data on financial markets. The 
RBI Handbook of Statistics of the India Economy – 2013-14 31 and the 
Handbook of statistics on the Indian Securities Market - 2014 32 published 
by SEBI contain comprehensive data on the financial market. The two together 
provide annual time series data on several aspects of the financial market: 
i) The structure of interest rates – call/notice money rates, commercial bank 
rate, lending rates of banks, prime lending rates (PLR) of term lending 
institutions like IDBI, dividend and yields of the units of UTI, annual 
gross redemption yields of Govt. Securities and average annual price and 
yield rate of Central Govt. securities (SGL transactions); 
ii) Financial assistance sanctioned and disbursed and financing of project 
cost of companies by FIs, loans sanctioned by HDFC and NABARD, and 
refinancing operations of National Housing Bank (NHB); 
iii) Aggregate deposits of NBFCs and Non-Banking Non-Financial Companies 
(NBNFCs)33 ; 
iv) Taxable and tax-free bonds issued by public sector undertakings – both 
public issue of bonds and privately placed bonds; 
v) Resource mobilization in the Private Placement Market – financial and 
non-financial institutions in the public and private sector; 
vi) Net resources mobilized by mutual funds (MFs) – MFs sponsored by 
banks, financial institutions (FIs), UTI and the private sector; 
vii) New capital issues (number and amount mobilized) by non-govt. public 
Ltd. Companies; 
                                                            
 
31  Also available on the RBI website http://www.rbi.org.in . In fact, the entire Handbook is 
available on the website. The web version can be downloaded from the website. For some 
of the financial market data longer time series are provided in the CD ROM and web 
versions. The CD ROM now incorporates intelligent search features that allows for searches 
across tables, enabling users to select one or more of any data series for any selected time 
period from any table in the handbook in a user-friendly manner. The data can be 
downloaded in the form of a user-defined spreadsheet table that can be read by most 
standard econometric software. 
32  Copies can be had from Research Deptt., SEBI, World Trade Centre I, 29 th floor, Cuffe 
Parade, Mumbai-400 005. This is also available on the website of SEBI – 
www.sebi.gov.in
and can be downloaded from the website. 
33  After the new regulatory framework for NBFCs came into force in 1998, the NBFCs and 
Residuary NBCs. 


--- Page 80 ---
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
80 
viii) Absorption of private capital issues – the no. of issuing companies, the 
number of shares and amount subscribed by promoters etc., and Govt., 
FLs etc., and the number of shares and amount subscribed by public, 
other than underwriters and other groups; 
ix) Investments of LIC by sector and instrument and of UTI by instrument; 
x) Assets and liabilities of institutions like IDBI, NABARD, EXIM Bank, 
NHB and SIDBI; 
xi) Annual averages share price indices – BSE SENSEX (base 1978-79 
=100), BSE National (base 1983-84 = 100) and RBI Index (base 1980-81 
= 100) and Market Capitalisation34; 
xii) Market intermediaries like stock exchanges (cash and derivatives 
market), brokers, corporate brokers, sub-brokers, custodians, FIIs, 
depositories, merchant bankers, bankers to issues and underwriters 
registered with SEBI; and registered brokers by stock exchanges and by 
ownership categories – proprietary, partnership and corporate; (SEBI); 
xiii) Long-term capital raised during 1957-90 (pre-reform period) through 
shares, debt and loans; (SEBI); 
xiv) Annual and monthly data series on resources raised by the corporate 
sector through (i) equity issues and (ii) debt issues (public issues and 
private placement) and the share of private placement in total debt and 
total resource mobilization and the share of debt in total resource 
mobilization; (SEBI); 
xv) Pattern of funding for non-govt, non-financial public limited companies – 
I. Internal sources [(i) reserves and surplus, and (ii) depreciation], and II. 
External sources [(paid up capital through new issues and premium), 
borrowings (debentures, from loans and from FIs) and trade dues and 
other current liabilities]; (SEBI); 
xvi) Annual and monthly series on resources mobilized, instrument wise, from 
the primary market – number and amount mobilized by category of issue 
(public issue and rights issue); by type of issues [by listed companies and 
initial Public Offerings (IPO)]; by equities at par and equities at a 
premium; cumulative convertible preference shares (CCPS); bonds; and 
others; (SEBI); 
xvii) Annual and monthly series of data on capital raised by (i) industrial 
(economic activity) classification (banks/FIs), industries like electronics, 
and engineering, entertainment, finance etc.; (ii) size of capital raised; 
(iii) sector (public and private); and (iv) region (north, east, south and 
west); (SEBI); 
xviii) Annual and monthly data series on the number and quantum of Euro 
Issues; (SEBI); 
                                                            
 
34 The compilation of the RBI Index was discontinued from 1999-00. The compilation of 
market capitalization – all India was discontinued by BSE since 1999-00. The SEBI 
Handbook provides data on market capitalization – all India from 1999-00 as given in the 
publication of the National Stock Exchange (NSE). 


--- Page 81 ---
 
 
81
Trade and Finance xix) Annual and monthly data series on transactions of MFs on the Stock 
Exchanges – gross purchases and sales and net purchase/sales in (a) 
equity, and (b) debt; (SEBI); 
xx) Trends on trading on stock exchanges – the number of shares traded and 
the number and value of shares delivered; (SEBI); 
xxi) Indicators of liquidity – Market capitalization – GDP ratio (BSE), market 
capitalization – GDP ratio (NSE), turnover ratio – BSE, traded value ratio 
– BSE, traded value ratio – NSE; (SEBI); 
xxii) Trends in foreign investment flows – direct and portfolio investment; 35 
(SEBI); 
xxiii) Annual and monthly series on trends in FII investment – gross purchases 
and sales and net investment; (SEBI); 
xxiv) Comparative evaluation of Indices through Price to Earnings Ratio and 
Price to Book Ratio (these are monthly averages of closing values) for 
BSE SENSEX, BSE 100 Index, S&P CNX NIFTY, CNK NIFTY Junior; 
(SEBI); and 
xxv) Survey of investor households – a joint effort of SEBI and the National 
Council of Applied Economic Research – result giving an estimate of 
investor and non-investor households by type of investment, household 
by type of instruments invested in and so on. 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) Which document does contain the methodology for compiling liquidity 
aggregates? 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) List the kind of time series data available in RBI Handbook 2013-14. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………. 
                                                            
 
35 Figures from 1995-96 include acquisition of shares of Indian companies by non-residents 
under S/6 of FEMA, 1999. Those from 2000-01 have been revised with expanded coverage 
to approach international best practices and are, therefore, not comparable with earlier data. 
