--- Page 38 ---
 
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
38 
We shall now look at two of the sectors of the economy in this unit. One is the 
agricultural sector that provides livelihood to roughly two-thirds of the total 
workforce in the country. The other is the industrial sector, which consists of 
manufacturing, power, gas and water supply. 
22.2  AGRICULTURAL DATA  
You are already aware of the importance of agriculture to the Indian economy 
and indeed to the Indian way of life. You would, therefore, like to examine 
several aspects of agriculture like the level of production of different crops and 
commodities, the availability and utilization of important inputs for agricultural 
production, incentives, availability of post-harvest services and the role of 
agriculture in development. Similarly, you would like to know about the livestock 
and their products, fisheries and forestry, people engaged in these activities and so 
on. All these analyses require enormous amount of data over time and space. Let us 
have a look at what kind of data are available and where. 
The Directorate of Economics and Statistics (DESMOA) in the Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation (website http://eands.dacnet.nic.in ) and the 
Animal Husbandry Statistics Division (AHSD) of the Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairy and Fisheries (website http://dahd.nic.in/dahd/statistics/ 
animal-husbandry-statistics.aspx) in the Ministry of Agriculture are the major 
sources of data on agriculture and allied activities. Among the major efforts at 
collection of data mounted at regular intervals, the following are the major 
ones: 
i) the quiquennial agricultural census and the input survey; 
ii) the cost of cultivation studies; 
iii) annual estimates of crop production; 
iv) the quinquennial livestock census; and 
v) integrated sample survey to estimate the production of major livestock 
products. 
DESMOA releases statistics on agriculture and allied activities flowing from 
its work and also collected from other division (like the Agricultural Census 
Division) and Departments of the Ministry of Agricultural and other Ministries 
and agencies in their comprehensive annual publication Agricultural Statistics 
at a Glance (ASG) 1. Other publications include, “Cost of Cultivation in 
India”, the monthly bulletin “Agricultural Situation In India”. AHSD 
publishes the data flowing from its activities [which include the activities 
mentioned at (iv) and (v) above] and those collected from other divisions of the 
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairy and Fisheries and other agencies in 
its biennial publication Basic Animal Husbandry Statistics (BAHS). 
22.2.1 Agricultural Census 
Agriculture Census forms part of a broader system of collection of Agricultural 
Statistics. It is a large-scale statistical operation for the collection and derivation of 
quantitative information about the structure of agriculture in the country. An 
                                                            
 
1 This can be accessed in the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture) website . 
One can also access www.data.gov.in and click on  


--- Page 39 ---
 
 
 
39
Agricultural and 
Industrial Data
agricultural operational holding is the ultimate unit for taking decision for 
development of Agriculture at micro level. It is for this reason that an 
operational holding is taken as the statistical unit of data collection for 
describing the structure of agriculture. Through Agriculture Census it is 
endeavored to collect basic data on important aspects of agricultural economy 
for all the operational holdings in the country. Aggregation of data is done at 
various levels of administrative units. The agricultural census started in  
1970-71. The ninth of these censuses relates to the reference year 2010-11. 
Periodic Agriculture Censuses are important as these are the main source of 
information on basic characteristics of operational holdings such as land use 
and cropping patterns, irrigation status, tenancy particulars and the terms of 
leasing. This information is tabulated by different size classes and social 
groups including Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes which are needed for 
development planning, socio-economic policy formulation and establishment 
of national priorities. The census also provides the basis for the development of 
a comprehensive integrated national system of agricultural statistics and has 
links with various components of the national statistical system. The whole 
project of Agriculture Census in the country is implemented in three distinct 
phases, which are statistically linked together but focus on different aspects of 
agricultural statistics. In Phase-I, a list of holdings with their area and social 
characteristics and gender of the holders is prepared. In Phase-II, detailed data 
on agricultural characteristics of holdings are collected from selected villages. 
Thus the whole operation of Agriculture Census in India is not really a 
complete Census. In fact, it is a combination of Census and Sample Survey.2 
The third phase, which is better known as the Input Survey and conducted in 
the year following the census year 3, relates to collection of data on the pattern 
of input-use across crops, regions and size-groups of holdings. The main 
objective of the input survey is to generate data on consumption of various 
agricultural inputs, according to major size-groups of operational holdings, 
viz., marginal (below 1 ha.), small (1- 1.99 ha.), semi-medium (2- 3.99 ha.), 
medium (4- 9.99 ha.) and large (10 ha. and above), for getting an insight into 
the consumption pattern of inputs by various categories of farmers. This 
information is vital for planning production, imports and distribution of 
fertilizers. The inputs covered in the survey include chemical fertilizers, HYV 
seeds, pesticides, farmyard manures/compost, bio-fertilizers, agricultural 
implements and machinery, livestock and agricultural credit besides data on 
input use including use of certified/notified seeds, high yielding variety seeds, 
pest control measurements adopted by cultivators, educational qualification, 
age and size of households of operational holders are captured through Input 
Survey. The results of the first phase, including the all-India report of the first 
phase of the ninth agricultural census can be accessed at http://agcensus.nic.in/ 
agcen201011.html. The provisional results of the second phase have also been 
released. Data collection and processing of the third phase is progressing in the 
different States and UTs. Selective information is also available on the 
internet4 through a query-based facility and can provide data on operational 
                                                            
 
2 This part is reproduced from http://agcensus.dacnet.nic.in/, which can be accessed to get the 
latest data, up to tehsil level from Agricultural Census 2013. 
3 The input survey was initiated in the 1975-76 Agricultural Census and conducted in 1976-77. 
4 On the website http://agcensus.dacnet.nic.in/nationalholdingtype.aspx, one can access tables 
related to agricultural census years 1995-96 to 2010-11. Further, On the website 
http://inputsurvey.dacnet.nic.in/nationalsummary.aspx one can access the tables related to 
1996-97 to 2006-07 so far. 


--- Page 40 ---
 
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
40 
holdings at the national, State, district and tehsil levels by type, characteristics 
and size class/group. You can, for example, get information on operational 
holdings by size class of the holding, social group (Scheduled Caste, Scheduled 
Tribe, Other and all groups) and tenancy characteristics of the holding (lease 
terms, land use, irrigation status, irrigation by sources, wells and tube wells, 
gross cropped area, cropping pattern, and area dispersal. Clearly, there is a time 
lag in the availability of agricultural census and Input Survey results. 
22.2.2 Studies on Cost of Cultivation 
DESMOA implements a comprehensive scheme for studying the cost of 
cultivation of principal crops in India and this results in the collection and 
compilation of field data on the cost of cultivation and production in respect of 
29 principal crops leading to estimates of crop-wise and State-wise costs of 
cultivation and also computation of the index of the terms of trade between 
agriculture and non-agricultural sectors . The scheme covers 19 States and 
foodgrain crops, oil seeds and commercial crops and selected vegetables. 
Statistics of cost of cultivation of principal crops are published by DESMOA 
in its publication “Cost of Cultivation in India” and also in ASG. The 
Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) makes use of the 
estimates of cost of cultivation and production and the structure of cost of 
cultivation flowing from these studies, along with an analysis of a wide spectrum 
of data on variables like market prices, productivity of the crops concerned, 
domestic and global inter-crop price parity, the terms of trade between the 
agricultural and the non-agricultural sectors and the supply-demand situation in 
arriving at their recommendations to Government on Minimum Support Prices 
(MSP). The CACP reports thus contain not only the data thrown up by the cost of 
cultivation studies but also those assembled by it from various sources for its work. 
For example any of the CACP report presents: 
i) estimates of cost of cultivation per hectare, cost of production per quintal, 
and the value of the main product and the byproduct; 
ii) the breakup of the cost by inputs like human labour, bullock labour, 
machine labour, seed, fertilizers and manures, insecticides, irrigation 
charges and so on; 
iii) a variable input price index; and 
iv) month-end wholesale prices of the commodities concerned by variety and 
location. 
for all the commodities dealt with in the report and for all states. In addition, it 
gives information on the index number of whole sale prices for farm inputs, 
index numbers of whole sale prices of cereals, pulses, etc., and data on a host 
of aspects relevant to the subject matter of the report like area, production, 
yield of major crops, buffer stock of cereals and month-wise and area-wise 
daily wage rates for agricultural labour 5. MSPs for different commodities are 
also published in ASG. 
                                                            
 
5 The cost of cultivation studies reports and related data can be accessed at 
http://eands.dacnet.nic.in/Cost_of_Cultivation.htm. Now, the data is available for reference 
years 2004-05 to 2011-12. The details regarding the work of CACP and the data presented in 
CACP reports are based on the information available in the CACP website 
http://cacp.dacnet.nic.in . The MSP up to agricultural year 2014-15 can be viewed in the 
link http://cacp.dacnet.nic.in/ViewContents.aspx?Input=1&PageId=36&KeyId=0A .  


--- Page 41 ---
 
 
 
41
Agricultural and 
Industrial Data
The other useful outcome of the cost of cultivation studies, as already 
mentioned, is the index of the terms of trade between the agricultural and 
non-agricultural sectors. This is defined as 
           IPR [Index of Prices Received] 
 Index of the Terms of Trade = ——————————————— 
                        IPP [Index of Prices Paid] 
             (Base Year : the triennium ending 1991-92) 
The numerator relates to the prices that the agricultural sector gets for its 
produce while the denominator relates to the prices that the sector pays for 
products it purchases for final consumption, intermediate consumption and 
capital formation. The time series of ITT from 1981-82 onwards, complete with 
individual values of IPR and IPP and those of the component indices of IPP, 
namely, final consumption (weight in IPP 73.54), intermediate consumption 
(weight in IPP 21.63) and capital formation (weight in IPP 4.83) are published 
in ASG. 
The Terms of Trade, specifically, the terms of trade between agriculture and 
industry is the ratio of agricultural prices to industrial prices, both measured as 
price indices. The terms of trade between agricultural and industry lies at the 
heart of the government's policy in the agricultural sector. A rise in the ratio 
(agricultural prices divided by industrial prices) means that the agricultural 
sector is better off in terms of its purchasing power of industrial goods. 
Suppose there are just two goods in the economy, bananas and pins and you 
produce and sell bananas. Both initially cost Rs. 10. If now both prices go up 
by 100 per cent, nothing happens to the terms of trade and purchasing power 
remains unchanged. If instead, banana prices go up by 100 per cent and the 
price of pins doesn't, then as a banana manufacturer you are better off since one 
banana can now buy two pins instead of one. The ratio or the terms of trade 
between bananas and pins has doubled. Substitute agriculture for bananas and 
industry for pins and you can get what a rise in agriculture's terms of trade does 
for farmers.6 
The National Statistical Commission has pointed out that there is a sizeable 
time lag in the availability of results for use in the work of CACP and that steps 
should be taken to cut down delays in the release of the results of these 
studies7. 
22.2.3 Annual Estimates of Crop Production 
DESMOA makes and releases annual estimates of area, production and yield 
in respect of principal crops of foodgrains, oil seeds, sugar cane, fibres and 
important commercial and horticulture crops. These crops account for about  
87 per cent of the total agricultural output. Estimates of area are based on a 
reporting system that is a mix of complete coverage and coverage by a sample, 
those of yield are based on a system of crop cutting experiments and General 
Crop Estimation Surveys . The preparation of these estimates takes time. 
Estimates of crop production are, however, needed earlier and in fact even 
                                                            
 
6 This part is taken from an article published in the economic times ET classrooms series, 
which can be accessed at http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2002-02-04/news/ 
27340862_1_bananas-issue-prices-trade.  
7 Report of the national Statistical Commission, Chapter 4. 


--- Page 42 ---
 
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
42 
before the crops are harvested, for policy purposes. Advance estimates of crop 
production are, therefore, made. The first assessment of the kharif crop is made 
in the middle of September, that is, when the South-West Monsoon is about to 
be over. The second advance estimate – a second assessment of the earlier 
estimate of the kharif crop and the first assessment of the rabi crop – is made in 
January. The third advance estimate is made at the end of March or the 
beginning of April and the fourth in June. The methodology for estimating area 
and yield of crops and for making advance estimates are given in ASG. 
Estimates of annual 8 production of the principal crops mentioned above, gross 
area under different crops and yield per hectare of these crops and Index 
Numbers on these variables with base year the triennium ending 2007-08 = 
1009 are also available in ASG in the form of a time series. So are estimates of 
production of crops by States. 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) Give two major sources of data on Agriculture and allied activities like 
dairy and fisheries. 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
2) How can you retrieve the agricultural census data at district and tehsil 
level? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
3) How are annual estimates of crop production made by the Directorate of 
Statistics and Economics? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
                                                            
 
8   Season-wise in some cases. 
9 The base of these index numbers is a triennium in order to even out year to year to 
fluctuations of the underlying variable(s). The earlier base TE 1981-82 for these index 
number series was changed to TE 1993-94 in 2000-01 in order to update the index numbers 
and also for these to be in harmony with the index numbers of wholesale prices and 
industrial production with base 1993-94 = 100. 


--- Page 43 ---
 
 
 
43
Agricultural and 
Industrial Data22.2.4 Livestock Census 
The last quinquennial livestock census, the nineteenth in the series, was 
conducted in 2012. The census has collected information, district-wise on 
livestock, poultry, fishery and also agricultural implements. Livestock covers 
cattle, buffaloes, sheep, goats, pigs, horses and ponies, mules, donkeys, camels, 
yak, mithun and also, dogs and rabbits. These are classified by age (appropriate 
for the species). sex, breed, function (‘breeding’, ‘work’, ‘both’ and ‘others’ for 
males and ‘in milk’ or ‘dry’ in the case of females). Poultry covers cock, hen, 
duck, and drake, which are classified as desi and ‘improved’ varieties. Fishery 
covers fishing activity (inland capture, inland culture, marine capture and 
marine culture), members involved in fishing (male, female and child), persons 
engaged in fishing (part time male, full time male, part time female and full 
time female) craft/gear, namely, trawlers, gin-netters, liners, seiners, motorized 
canoe/maran, non-motorized canoe/maran, and miscellaneous gears like trawler-
net, gill netter-net, cast-net, drag-net, hook lines, set barriers and others. Each 
of these classes except the last one is further classified into size (length) and 
horsepower. Agricultural implements cover annually operated implements, 
animal operated implements, plant protection equipment, water lifting devices, 
tractor and power operated implements, equipment for livestock and poultry 
and horticulture tools. Each group provides further data on four or five specific 
equipments like for example, thresher under the first group, ST Plough under 
the second, TPO Spray under the third, diesel under the fourth, Crawler Tractor 
under the fifth, incubator under the sixth and power operated tools under the 
seventh group. 
The provisional results of the 2012 census are available on the website of the 
Department of Animal Husbandry, which can be accessed at http://dahd.nic.in/ 
dahd/WriteReadData/Livestock.pdf. ASG and BAHS also present some data 
from the livestock census. 
22.2.5 Data on Production of Major Livestock Products 
AHSD is responsible for collection of statistics on animal husbandry, dairy and 
fisheries. These are published, as already mentioned, in BAHS. The latest 
relates to 2004. This presents data up to 2003-04, on 
i) long time series of estimates of production of milk, eggs, meat and wool; 
ii) State-wise short time series of such estimates; 
iii) State-wise and national estimates of per capita availability of milk and 
eggs; 
iv) contribution of cows, buffaloes and goats to milk production and of fowls 
and ducks to egg production in different States in 2003-04; 
v) average annual growth rates of production of major livestock products, 
milk, eggs and wool; 
vi) short time series on imports and exports of livestock and livestock 
products; 
vii) short time series on area under fodder crops, pastures and grazing in 
different States; 
viii) estimates of dry and green fodder production in different States during the 
three-year period ending 2002-03; 


--- Page 44 ---
 
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
44 
ix) a short time series on the no. of artificial inseminations performed in 
different States; 
x) achievements in key components of dairy development; 
xi) livestock and poultry (numbers) in India and in different States – 1992, 
1997 and 2003; and 
xii) time series on world livestock production and milk production. 
22.2.6 Agricultural Statistics at a Glance (ASG) 
The pocket book on agricultural statistics and the agricultural statistics at a 
glance are two annual publications available in the website http://eands.dacnet. 
nic.in/latest_2006.htm. One of the most important statistics, which is the 
statistics on Land utilization, is available in the ASG. As for inputs and access 
of individual operational holdings to such inputs, ASG provides data on: 
i) Methodology of crop estimation, 
ii) Socio-economic indicators: population and growth rates, State-wise 
classification of cultivators, Gross State Domestic Product for agriculture 
and allied activities,  
iii) Outlays, expenditure and capital formation in agriculture, 
iv) Area, production and yield of principal crops: target and achievement of 
production of major crops, three largest producing States of important 
crops, season-wise area, production and yield of food grains (rice, wheat, 
jowar, bajra, maize, total pulses, gram, tur, masur, nine oilseeds, groundnut, 
rapseed and mustard, soyabean, sunflower), cotton, jute, mesta, sugarcane, 
tobacco, guarseeed, etc.; yield rates of principal crops, area and yield under 
the high yielding varieties, area and production of horticulture and plantation 
crops (potato, onion, coconut, cashewnut, arecanut, garlic, ginger, sweet 
potato, turmeric, chillies, cardamom, pepper); 
v) All-India index numbers of area, production and yield of principal crops; 
vi) Area, production and yield of major crops in different countries; 
vii) Minimum support prices/marketed surplus ratios of various agricultural 
commodities; 
viii) Procurement by public agencies, per capita net availability of foodgrains, 
consumption and stocks of foodgrains and raw jute,  
ix) Import and export .of agricultural commodities, tariffs and bound rates of 
major agricultural commodities, trends in wholesale price index of 
foodgrains and commercial crops; 
x) Land use statistics: agricultural land by use in India, selected categories 
of land use; 
xi) Inputs: production and use of agricultural inputs (fertilizers, crop-wise 
distribution of certified/quality seeds, consumption of electricity for 
agricultural purposes, flow of institutional credit for agricultural sector, 
state-wise number of kisan credit cards, state-wise/season-wise national 
agricultural insurance scheme, etc. 


--- Page 45 ---
 
 
 
45
Agricultural and 
Industrial Data
xii) Agricultural census data: number and area of operational holdings by size 
group – marginal (size less than one HA 10 area), small (1 to 2 HA), semi-
medium (2 to 4 HA), medium (4 to 10 HA) and large (more than 10 HA), 
area irrigated by different source of irrigation and by size class  and the 
position in different States; 
xiii) Estimated number of rural households, farmer households, indebted 
farmer households by size class of land possessed; 
xiv) Ceiling on land holding and wages for agricultural work; 
xv) Livestock population in India, all-India and State-wise production of 
milk, eggs, meat and wool; 
xvi) Fish production in India and States; 
xvii) Rainfall scenario and management of natural disaster. 
The subjects Subsidies is a much-debated subject nowadays and agricultural 
subsidies in developing countries and developed countries of Europe and in 
USA are also much in the news. The Ministry of Agriculture provides a time 
series of the amount of subsidy given to agricultural with its break-up into 
subsidy for (i) fertilizers (ii) electricity, and (iii) irrigation 11, (iv) other 
subsidies given to marginal farmers and Farmers Cooperative Societies in the 
form of seeds, development of oil seeds, pulses, etc. One can easily derive the 
size of the total subsidy relative to GDP in current prices. The limitations to 
which these figures are subject need to be kept in mind.  
22.2.7    Another Source of Data on Irrigation 
The data on irrigation presented in ASG (referred to the proceeding sub-
section) is based on crop statistics collected by DESMOA from village through 
a mix of a reporting system and sample surveys. The Central Water 
Commission (CWC) under the Ministry of Water Resources collects 
hydrological data on the important river systems in the country through 877 
hydrological observation sites. The Ministry also conducts periodic Censuses 
of Minor Irrigation Works along with a sample check to correct the Census 
data. The five Census conducted so far related to 1986-87, 1993-94, 2000-01,  
2006-07 and 2013-14. This is conducted in all States/UTs except in Daman & 
Diu and Lakshadweep. The reports can be seen in the website of the Ministry 
http://micensus.gov.in.The Report of the Minor Irrigation Census 2006-07 
provides information on the 20.7 million minor irrigation works in the country 
like the share of ground water and surface water works, crop-wise utilization of 
the irrigation potential created, the manner in which the water is distributed in 
the field – sprinkler, drip, open channel or underground water irrigation and 
state-wise distribution of these variables. 
The National Commission on Statistics had in their report made the following 
observations12 on irrigation data available from DESMOA and the Ministry of 
Water Resources: 
                                                            
 
10 HA: abbreviation for hectare. 
11 The rates for supply of water to farmers are kept low as a matter of policy. This results in a 
loss to the Government Irrigation System. The excess of operating costs over gross revenue 
is treated as imputed irrigation subsidy. 
12 Chapter 4 of the Report. 


--- Page 46 ---
 
 
 
Data Base of Indian 
Economy 
46 
i) The CWC had a large volume of data on various aspects of irrigation 
without any statistical analysis of such data being carried out. The CSO 
and the CWC need to get together and ensure that the data collected in 
analysed and put to use by the statistical machinery. 
ii) There is a large variation between the statistics on the “area irrigated” 
published by DESMOA and the “irrigation potential actually utilized” 
published by the Ministry of Water Resources. 
iii) Data users should be made aware of the reasons for such variation – 
differences (if any) in concepts, definition etc. 
iv) The reluctance on the part of the State Governments to furnish data in 
view of their vested interest in the sharing of water is an added problem. 
v) Data from both the sources – DESMOA and the Ministry of Water 
Resources – are available after a large time lag and this needs to be 
reduced. 
22.2.8 Other Data on the Agricultural Sector 
Data on forest cover is, already mentioned, as part of land-use statistics 
presented on the basis of nine fold land-use classification in ASG. Forest 
Survey of India (FSI) also collects data on forest cover (dense forest, open 
forest and mangroves) through a biennial survey by making of Remote Sensing 
(RS) technology since 1987. The latest survey relates to 2013. Digital 
interpretation has reduced the time lag in the availability of such data obtained 
earlier through periodic reports from field formations. There are discrepancies 
between the data on forest area given by ASG and those given by FSI due to 
differences in the concepts and definitions used by the two organizations in 
collecting data. Data on production of industrial wood, minor forest produce 
and fuel wood are available with the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests 
in the Ministry of Environment and Forests. 
The National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD)  is 
another agency that is closely involved in agriculture, especially in the matter 
of credit to the sector through cooperatives. The annual reports of NABARD 
and its publication like “Statistical Statements Relating to the Cooperative 
Movement in India” (Part I deals with credit societies and the other with non-
credit societies) and “Key Statistics on Cooperative Banks”, besides 
NABARD’s website (https://www.nabard.org/english/home.aspx) would be 
useful source of information on agricultural credit. 
Statistics on area, production and yield of crops and subsidies given to 
agriculture are also available as time series in the Economic Survey, 
expenditure budget documents of the Ministry of Finance and the RBI 
Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy (http://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/ 
rdocs/Publications/PDFs/000HSE13120914FL.pdf). The third source is 
important in the context of the policy direction to banks and all financial 
institutions to ensure that 40 per cent of the total institutional credit should flow 
to the priority sector of which agricultural sector forms a part. The data 
warehouse of the RBI can be accessed at http://dbie.rbi.org.in. The RBI 
Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy – 2013-14 publishes time series 
data on: 
i) National income, saving and employment from 1952-53 onwards; 


--- Page 47 ---
 
 
 
47
Agricultural and 
Industrial Data
ii) Output and prices of agricultural production, from 1956-57 onwards; 
iii) Assets and liabilities of the RBI, components of money stock, etc. from 
1962-63 onwards; 
iv) Select aggregates of Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs), like demand 
deposit, time deposit, borrowings from RBI, liabilities to banks, 
investment in Government securities, food credit, non-food credit, cash in 
bank, balance with RBI, assets with banks from 1956-57 onwards; 
v) Sectoral deployment of non-food gross bank credit; industry-wise 
deployment of gross bank credit; 
vi) Direct and indirect institutional credit to agriculture and allied activities, 
1975-76 onwards; 
vii) SCB’s direct finance to farmers according to size of land holdings, 1985-
86 onwards; 
viii) the distribution of non-food credit by priority sector credit and credit for 
other sectors;  
ix) the share of agriculture in priority sector credit; 
x) Financial market: structure of interest rate, etc.; 
xi) Public finances: key deficit indicators of central Government, major 
components of receipts of central Government, key deficit indicators of 
state governments, pattern of receipts of state governments, etc.; 
xii) Trade and balance of payment, etc. 
Direct credit to agriculture is also available from other institutions and the 
Handbook furnishes data on: 
i) the short and long term loans issued by each of the institutions – 
Cooperatives, Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs), Regional Rural 
Banks (RRBs) and the State Governments directly to beneficiaries or 
borrows for agriculture and activities allied to it during a year; and 
ii) the loans outstanding at the end of each year. 
Institutions like SCBs, Cooperative, RRBs and the Rural Electrification 
Corporation (REC) provide indirect credit to agriculture and allied activities. 
This is routed through some other agency, conduit or tier like the Electricity 
Boards (EBs), the Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS), the Farmers’ 
Service Societies (FSS), the Large-sized Adivasi Multi-Purpose Societies 
(LAMPS) and State-supported corporations and agencies. Such indirect credit 
is designed to promote agricultural productivity or to increase the agricultural 
income of the ultimate beneficiary, through a number of steps like distribution 
of fertilizers and other inputs to these activities, loans to EBs and loans to 
farmers through PACS, FSS and LAMPS. Other types of indirect credit include 
advances to State-supported corporations and agencies for onward lending of 
funds (up to Rs. 10,000/-) to weaker sections of society engaged in agriculture, 
namely, small and marginal farmers and those engaged in activities allied to 
agriculture. 
We have already seen in the preceding Unit (on Macro-variable like national 
income) that National Accounts Statistics (NAS) publishes data on the 
contribution of agriculture and its sub-sectors to GDP and other measures of 
