School of Social Sciences

Indira Gandhi National Open University QU ANTITATIVE Mi ETH ODS

us WwW

PROBABILITY +:

n CR } . a =
| ore. -
rT ie
if i) 3)
Ri. a

: =
: 4 Ppa Mem rer
. ; -
mea ; ’ =
” - f

Volume-1
©))|'Sases MEC-203
UNIVERSITY
QUANTITATIVE METHODS

(Vol. 1)

ignou
THE PEOPLE'S
UNIVERSITY

©)

School of Social Sciences

Indira Gandhi National Open University
Maidan Garhi, New Delhi-110068
EXPERT COMMITTEE

Prof. Atul Sarma (retd.)
Former Director

Indian Statistical Institute,
New Delhi

Dr. Indrani Roy Chowdhury
CSRD, School of Social Sciences
Jawaharlal Nehru University
New Delhi

Prof. Prem S.Vashistha

Former Director, Agro Economic
Research Centre, Delhi School of
Economics, University of Delhi,
New Delhi

Prof. Subrata Guha,

CESP, School of Social Sciences,
Jawaharlal Nehru University,
New Delhi

Dr. Rajeev Malhotra,

Professor & Executive Director,
OP Jindal Global University,
Gurugram, Haryana

Prof. Kaustuva Barik
Indira Gandhi National Open
University, New Delhi

Prof. B S Prakash
Indira Gandhi National Open
University, New Delhi

Sh. Saugato Sen

Associate Professor of Economics,
Indira Gandhi National Open
University,

New Delhi

Dr. Vijeta Banwari
Associate Professor of
Economics,

Indira Gandhi National
Open University, New
Delhi

Dr. Nidhi Tewathia
Assistant Professor of
Economics,

Indira Gandhi National
Open University, New
Delhi

Prof. Narayan Prasad
(Convener)

Indira Gandhi National
Open University,

New Delhi

PROGRAMME COORDINATORS

Prof. Narayan Prasad
Professor of Economics,

School of Social Sciences, IGNOU, New Delhi

Dr. Vijeta Banwari,
Associate Professor,

School of Social Sciences, IGNOU, New Delhi

COURSE COORDINATOR

Dr. Nidhi Tewathia

Assistant Professor, Discipline of Economics, SOSS, IGNOU, New Delhi

COURSE EDITORS

FORMAT AND LANGUAGE EDITING

Prof. Manohal Lal (Block 1,2,3,4 & 7)

Shri Saugato Sen (Block 5 & 6)

Dr. Indrani Roy Choudhary (Block 8 & 9)

Dr. Nidhi Tewathia

Assistant Professor, Discipline of Economics,

SOSS, IGNOU, New Delhi

Adaptation of units from course MEC-103

Dr. Nidhi Tewathia (Units- 4,5,6,9,10,11,12,16,17,20,25-31)

PRINT PRODUCTION

SECRETARIAL ASSISTANCE

Mr. Tilak Raj, Assistant Registrar, IGNOU, New Delhi

Sh. Ankur Gupta, SOSS, IGNOU, New Delhi

Graphics/ Cover Design —
September, 2023

© Indira Gandhi National Open University, 2023

ISBN : 978-93-5568-925-2

All rights reserved. No part of this work may be produced in any form, by mimeograph or any other means, without
permission in writings from the Indira Gandhi National Open University.
Further information on the Indira Gandhi National Open University courses may be obtained from the University’s

office at Maidan Garhi, New Delhi -110068 or visit our website: http://www.ignou.ac.in

Printed and published on behalf of the Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi, by Registrar, MPDD.
Printed at : Dee Kay Printers, 5/37 A, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 110 015

2
COURSE PREPARATION TEAM

Unit Block/Unit Title Unit Writer
BLOCK 1 | REVIEW OF BASIC MATHEMATICS
Unit 1 Fundamental Concepts of
Mathematics Dr. Meenakshi Sridhar, Associate Professor,
Unit 2 Overview of Basic Methods of Department of Computer Sciences,
Mathematics Rajdhani College, University of Delhi,
Delhi
Unit 3 Relations and Functions
Unit 4 Co-ordinate Geometry and Prof. Gopinath Pradhan
Representation of Functions
BLOCK 2 | LINEAR ALGEBRA
Unit 5 Matrix Algebra
Unit 6 Vector Analysis Sunando Basu
Unit 7 Vectors and Matrices
Unit 8 Vector and Matrix Representations of | Dr. Meenakshi Sridhar, Associate Professor,
Linear Equations Department of Computer Sciences, Rajdhani
College, University of Delhi, Delhi
BLOCK 3 | CALCULUS
Unit 9 Limit and Continuity
Unit 10 Differential Calculus: Functions of
One Variable Sunando Basu & Prof. Gopinath Pradhan
Unit 11 Differential Calculus: Functions of
Several Variables
Unit 12 Integration: Introduction and Prof. Gopinath Pradhan
Techniques
BLOCK 4 | REAL ANALYSIS
Unit 13 Real Analysis Dr. Meenakshi Sridhar, Associate Professor,
Unit 14 Calculus of Several Variables Department of Computer Sciences,
Unit 15 Basic Concepts of Metric Space and Rajdhani College, University of Delhi,
Point Set Topology Delhi
BLOCK 5 | EXTREME VALUES AND OPTIMISATION
Unit 16 Optimisation: An Introduction Sunando Basu
Unit 17 Unconstrained and Constrained Rittwik Chatterjee
Optimisation
Unit 18 Advanced Topics in Optimisation— I | Dr. Ram Prasad Yadav, Assistant Professor,
Unit 19 Advanced Topics in Optimisation — IT Dep artment of Mathematics, SRM
University, Sonepat, Haryana

BLOCK 6 | ECONOMIC DYNAMICS
Unit 20 Difference Equations: Theory and
Economic Applications Prof. Gopinath Pradhan
Unit 21 Differential Equations
BLOCK 7 | DYNAMIC OPTIMISATION
Unit 22 Intertemporal Optimisation-I
Unit 23 Intertemporal Optimisation-II Mr. Debasish Dash, Independent Researcher
——— New Delhi
Unit 24 Economic Applications of Dynamic
Optimisation
BLOCK 8 | PROBABILITY AND PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTIONS
Unit 25 Probability Theory
Unit 26 Probability Distributions-I Sisir Debnath
Unit 27 Probability Distributions-II
BLOCK 9 | INFERENTIAL STATISTICS
Unit 28 Sampling Theory Biswadeep Basu
Unit 29 Sampling Distributions
Unit 30 Estimation Biswadeep Basu
(updation by Ms. Nivedita Mullick)
Unit 31 Hypothesis Testing Biswadeep Basu

COURSE CONTENTS

(Volume 1)
BLOCK 1 REVIEW OF BASIC MATHEMATICS Page
Unit 1 Fundamental Concepts of Mathematics 15
Unit 2 Overview of Basic Methods of Mathematics 43
Unit 3 Relations and Functions 74
Unit 4 Co-ordinate Geometry and Representation of 106
Functions
BLOCK 2 LINEAR ALGEBRA
Unit 5 Matrix Algebra 155
Unit 6 Vector Analysis 187
Unit 7 Vectors and Matrices 198
Unit 8 Vector and Matrix Representations of Linear 211
Equations
BLOCK 3 CALCULUS
Unit 9 Limit and Continuity 235
Unit 10 Differential Calculus: Functions of One Variable 248
Unit 11 Differential Calculus: Functions of Several Variables 271
Unit 12 Integration: Introduction and Techniques 286

ignou
THE PEOPLE'S
UNIVERSITY

COURSE INTRODUCTION

The importance of quantitative methods in economic analysis cannot be undermined.
Apart from helping us in quantitative expression of attributes, it allows greater precision
and accuracy in measurement. We observe an ever-increasing usage of mathematics and
statistics in all branches of economics. This calls for an extensive and compulsory study
of quantitative methods in the present academic programme. After going through this
course a student will be able to:

e use mathematics as a language to represent economic ideas, concepts, phenomena,
and relationship among variables;

e apply mathematics as a tool to explain various economic phenomena, events and
situations at local, regional, national and global level;

e acquire basic knowledge of mathematical methods and statistical tools to explain
economic theory;

e apply optimization techniques to find out optimum level of objective functions
pursued by economic agents; and

e apply statistical tools for data presentation, data analysis, hypothesis formulation, and
testing of hypothesis.

The course is divided into nine blocks comprising thirty-one Units.

Block 1, entitled Review of Basic Mathematics, provides an overview of fundamental
concepts of mathematics. It comprises four Units. Unit 1 deals with the basic concepts of
set theory while Unit 2 discusses algebraic concepts and expressions such as polynomial
functions. Unit 3 deals with relations and functions and their types. Representation of
such functions through coordinate geometry is the subject matter of Unit 4.

Block 2, entitled Linear Algebra, comprises four Units. Unit 5 provides an overview of
matrix algebra, particularly the concepts of determinants, cofactors and matrix
operations. Unit 6 deals with vector space and different types of vector operations. Unit 7
moves into further issues related to vectors and matrices such as characteristic values,
Eigen values and vector differentiation. Unit 8 deals with linear independence of vectors
and certain concepts such as R” space.

Block 3, comprising four Units, provides certain introductory ideas on Calculus. Unit 9
focuses on limit and continuity of a function. Unit 10 introduces the concept of
differentiation of a function, particularly the one-variable case. In the process it interprets
the concept and provides several illustrations from economics. Unit 11 continues with
differentiation of functions in several-variables case. Unit 12 deals with the concept and
applications of integration in the field of economics.

Block 4, entitled Real Analysis, comprises three Units. Unit 13 introduces the students to
n-dimensional real space and mathematical logic. Unit 14 extends the ideas discussed in
the previous Unit further to the several-variables case. Unit 15 discusses basic concepts
of matrix space and point set topology. This block includes several important topics such
as extreme value theorem, mean value theorem and Taylor’s theorem.

Block 5, entitled Extreme Values and Optimisation, builds upon the previous two
blocks. It comprises four Units. Unit 16 deals with the concept of optimization in one-
variable and several-variables cases. Through several examples, the Unit illustrates how
maxima and minima of a function can be identified. Unit 17 extends the topic further to
the constrained-optimisation scenario. Units 18 and 19 carry forward the topic of
constrained optimisation to an advanced level and deal with several variants of
constraints that find applications in the field of economics.

The title of Block 6 is Economic Dynamics, and it deals with the time path followed by
economic variables. Unit 20 deals with the theory and applications of difference
equations, which treats time as a discrete variable. The solution to first order and second
order difference equations are presented in the Unit. Unit 21 presents the continuous
variables case and discusses the theory and applications of differential equations in the
field of economics.

Block 7, titled Dynamic Optimisation, consists of three Units. Unit 22 introduces the
students to the issue of intertemporal optimisation, that is, optimisation of variables in
cases involving several time periods. It deals with the Euler’s equation, its solution and
applications in economics. Unit 23 continues with the topic of intertemporal optimisation
and deals with on optimal control problems. Unit 24 focuses on economic applications of
dynamic optimisation problems.

Block 8, entitled Probability and Probability Distributions, comprises three Units.
Unit 25 deals with the concept of probability and various theorems on probability. For
better elucidation the Unit provides a number of examples where various probability laws
are applied. Unit 26 presents discrete probability distributions such as binomial and
Poisson. Unit 27, in a similar vein, presents continuous probability distributions such as
normal distribution.

Block 9, consisting of four Units, focuses on Inferential Statistics. Unit 28 discusses
issues related to drawing of various types of samples from a population. The concept,
properties and applications of sampling distribution are presented in Unit 29. In Unit 30
the issues related to estimation of parameters on the basis of a sample is discussed. The
concluding unit of the course, Unit 31, deals with the formulation and testing of
hypothesis and drawing inferences on the basis hypothesis testing.
MATHEMATICAL SYMBOLS/ NOTATIONS

USED IN THE COURSE

Symbol Symbol Name/Meaning Attached
[a,b] Closed interval
(a,b) Open interval
= Element of
A Delta/Change in
dx Differential
iim F(x) Limit
ln Natural log
; :
{ f(xdx Definite Integral
V Universal quantifier: :for all”
4 Existential quantifier: “there exists”
Ay Existential quantifier: “there exists exactly one”
AY Existential quantifier: “there exists more than one”
= Negation; =P “not P”
A Conjunction: “and”
Vv Disjunction: “or”
=> Implication; p > q”if p then q”
cs Equivalence: “if and only if”
a,xER Numbers, scalars

d =(,,a),...,a,) ER!

Vector of parameters

X =(X,,%X,--5X,) ER’

Vector of variables

A,X

Sets

A,X Matrices (with dimensions m by) with m rows and n
columns

x~y Vector x is indifferent with respect to vector y

> Strong preference relation

X~y Vector x is strongly preferred over vector y

> (weak) Preference relation

X>y Vector x is (weakly) preferred over vector y

R Set of real numbers

R, Set of nonnegative real numbers

intR, Set of positive real numbers

R’” =RxRx...xR n— Dimensional space of real numbers, Cartesian

product of set R

Ri ={xeER"| x20} CR"

Nonnegative orthant (subspace) of set R”

intR! CR’

Interior of set R”

f:Xx3Y

Function,

X— Domain of a function (set of arguments of a
function)

Y —Codomain of a function (set of values of a
function)

9

