Review of Basic
Mathematics

140

Economists call the level curves of a utility function indifference curves and
those of a production function is o guants. Thus, level curves have algebraic
equations of the form f (x, y)=k for all possible values of k. A contour diagram
or contour map of a function f (x, y) is a 2-dimensionalgraph (Fig. 4.43)

showing several level curves in the xy-plane corresponding to several values of
k.

>
¥

Good X~

Fig. 4.43: Indifference Curve Map
Example: Cobb-Douglas Production Model

Given P=the monetary value of all goods produced, K= total capital investment
over the same period, and L= the total labor force, the following relationship
between these quantities holds: =1.01L°”°K°”>

The contour diagram shown in Fig. 4.44 below shows that reducing labour

Fig. 4.44: Indifference Curve Map- Cobb Douglas Example

increases capital investment in order to maintain the same level of production
1.e., Supposedly more investment is needed in machinery to make up for the lack
of available labour. Conversely, increasing labour reduces capital investment
since supposedly the work is being done by the labor force.

Example:
Let f (x,)=x°—y*. We will study the level curves c=x*—y’.

First, look at the case c=0.The level curve equation x* — y* = 0 factors to (x — y).
(x + y) = 0. This equation is satisfied if either y = x or y = —x. Both these are
equations for lines, so the level curve for c=0 is two lines.

If c#0, then we can rewrite the level curve equation c=x*—y’ as 1= x°c—y’c.

See that this is the equation for a hyperbola. If c is positive, the hyperbolas open
to the left and right. If c is negative, the hyperbolas open up and down.
For example, if c=1, the equation is x"—y*=1. If c=—1, the equation is x°—y*=1. Coordinate

Several level curves are plotted in Fig. 4.45. Geometry and
Representation

of Functions

-1
-2 x
Fig.4.45: Level Curves
Check Your Progress 7

1) Explain the meaning of level curve.

wee rere rec reece e rere sre rere rere rereeeeeesresesreresreresresresrereseesrereeerereresresreresesreeeeeeereresrerecce
ee eer erer ere sre rere ere rere rere eeeeesre rere sreeresreereeeeeersesresereeresreeereerereeeesresreeereeresreresreereerecce
eo rer erec reece eee ere erec ere ere ere eee eee rere eeecer eee rere rere ee eeee eee eeere rere ere ereee reer eeeeeereeoeeeereeeeeeoe

eer ere rere rece er rere resrerere rere sresreresreeesesreresreresresresesresesreeeresreresresresresresresresreeeeereresreccce

eo ee ece reece rere rere ere rere ere rere eeresre reser esrereereeseeeresresrerererererereeseeereresrereresresreereeeereece
eo eoere ere sre creer ere rere eeeee ee ere ere re rere ere rere es eeresreresrereerereereereee eee sere reser e rere reese eee eece
eee errr e rere rere rere sere sreeeresrererereere reser esreeereeresresreereresresresre sere esreresreresresre sre seeeeececcces

3) Suppose a function is defined by f(x,y)=Ifor all (x,y). Comment on the
shape of level curves.

ooo ere er ere rere rere reese eeee ere sre rere sere eeeereeeesrereresreereeeereereereeeeerere rere rereerereeeeeeceece
eee rere rc ere ere rere re reser ereereresrerereereereresresreresreeeresrereresre reser esreeerereresrere rere reeeereecececes

Lene eee e ee eee EEE EE EEE EERE EE EEE EEE EE EEE EEE EEE EEE e EEE EEE Sees EEE EEE Sees EERE Eee ee EEE EES 14]
Review of Basic
Mathematics

142

4.9 LET US SUM UP

In this unit we discussed mainly the method of sketching graphs of functions.
However, first we discussed how to obtain algebraic equations corresponding to
some well-known geometric figures. In the reverse direction, for the purpose of
graphing functions, starting with relationship between elements of domain and
co-domain, we recalled the basis of functional relationships. An operational
method of dealing with a function was pointed out to identify dependent and
independent variables. Thus, we discussed y = f(x), it would be to treat x as the
independent variable picked up from among the elements of domain and y to be
the dependent variable present as an element in the range. Such a formulation
helped translate the functional relationships into graphical representation in the
rectangular co-ordinate system where x-a x is would contain the values taken by
independent variables and they-ax is the values of dependent variables. Before
proceeding with a process of sketching graph of a function, the use of vertical
line test for testing a relationship for its possibly being a functional relationship
was discussed. According to this test, equations of circle and ellipse etc. fail to
meet its requirement of functional relationship.

While dealing with the method of drawing the graph, the unit considered
functions in five groups, viz., linear, curve, asymptotic, piece-wise and curve
with branches. The linear types of graphs were drawn when the functions would
be in the nature of linear, absolute value or step-like. In cases of graphs showing
curves, functions included were odd and even, quadratic and cubic. Among the
graph of asymptotic types, functions included were square root, exponential and
logarithmic. Graphs appearing in pieces in the xy—plane comprised rational
functions, piecewise functions and discontinuous functions. In the last group of
graph shaving curve with branches functions concerned with hyperbola and
rectangular hyperbola were discussed. In the last part of the present unit, graphs
of functions with two variables were introduced.

4.10 KEY WORDS

Abscissa : x-coordinate (horizontal) of a point in a 2-
dimensional coordinate system.

Absolute Value : Obtaining the absolute value (or magnitude) of a

Function number.

Asymptote : A line that a curve approaches, as it heads towards
infinity.

Asymptotic : Graph approaching a point but never touching the

Discontinuity point.

Axis of Symmetry : A line of symmetry for a graph. The two sides of a
graph on either side of the axis of symmetry look
like mirror images of each other.
Cobb-Douglas
Production
Function

Contour Diagram
(contour map)

Co-ordinates

Cubic Function

Directrix

Discontinuous
Function

Even Function

Exponential
Function

Hyperbola

Indifference Curve
Map
Isoquants

Jump Discontinuity

Level Curves

Logarithmic
Function

Odd Function

Production function which is applied to describe
how much output two inputs into a production
process make.

Graph that provides one way of visualizing
functions of two variables.

Any of a set of two or more numbers used to
determine the position of a point, line, curve, or
plane in a space of a given dimension with respect
to a system of lines or other fixed references.

A polynomial function of degree 3.

A line perpendicular to the axis of symmetry of a
parabola.

A function which for certain values or between
certain values of the variable does not vary
continuously as the variable increases.

Univariate function is f(x) is said to be even
provided that f(x)=f(—x).

Function defined by ex p(z)=e2.

A hyperbola is a curve where the distances of any
point from: a fixed point (the focus), and a fixed
straight line (the directrix) are always in the same
ratio.

A group of indifference curves for two commodities
showing different levels of satisfaction.

A graph of all possible combinations of inputs that
result in the production n of a given level of output.

A function that jumps from one location to another
at a certain point.

A contour diagram or contour map of a function
f(x;y) 1s a 2 dimensional graph showing several
level curves in the xy—plane.

A function (as y = log , x or y = In x) that is the
inverse of an exponential function (as y = a’ or
y =e) so that the independent variable appears in a
logarithm.

Univariate function f(x) is said to be odd provided

that f(—x)=— f(x).

Coordinate
Geometry and
Representation
of Functions

143
Review of Basic
Mathematics

144

Ordinate

Piecewise Function
(split function)

Point Discontinuity

Polar Coordinates

Quadratic Function

Rational Function

Rectangular Co-
ordinate System

Rectangular
Hyperbola

Square Root
Function

Step Function
Vertex

Vertical Line Test
of Function

Element of an ordered pair which is plotted on the
vertical axis of a two-dimensional Cartesian
coordinate system.

A function can be in Pieces.

Graph of the function has a hole at x=a.

A two-dimensional coordinate system in which each
point P on a plane is determined by a distance rfrom
a fixed point Othat is called the pole (or origin) and
an angle @ from a fixed direction.

A function that can be described by an equation of
the form(x)=ax’+bx+c, where a#0.

A function that is the ratio of two polynomials.

Two real number lines that intersect at a right angle.

A hyperbola for which the asymptotes are
perpendicular.

A function that maps these to f non-negative real
numbers onto itself.

A function whose graph looks like a series of steps.
A synonym for anode of a graph.

A vertical line anywhere on a graph so that it hits
the graph in more than one spot, then the graph is
not a function.

4.11 ANSWERS/ HINTS TO CHECK YOUR
PROGRESS EXERCISE

Check Your Progress 1

1) The graph is

By the vertical line test, this graph is not the graph of a function, because

there are many vertical lines that hit more than once.
2) As in the case of straight line, for translating the geometric figure a circle,
create a coordinate system around the object, with centre of circle as origin
of coordinate system, as shown below.

OD,

Mark an arbitrary point, say P, on the circle, as (x, y). Draw a perpendicular

from P onto X-axis, meeting it in say point Q. Then length of perpendicular
is of length y. and x is the length of the intercept on X-axis. Then from
conventional/ synthetic geometry, we know

vty=r

is an algebraic equation of the circle with radius r.

Check Your Progress 2
1) First prepare the t-chart which is Table :t-chart of y=(—5/3) x —2
x y=(—5/3) x —2
-6 8
-3 -2
0 2
3 -7

Then you draw the graph.

2) x =4/3 or x = -8/3
3) f(x) = 25 + 0.30x, for 0 <x < 500

100+0.15x, for 500<x<1000

Check Your Progress3
yA
1)
3 —
2

Ca
I
nN
I
ena)

I

mh
ae

Ay

Coordinate
Geometry and
Representation
of Functions

145
Review of Basic
Mathematics

146

2) Accurve like’s’.

Check Your Progress 4

1) The x intercept is found by solving f (x)=0 or, x + 1=0. The x intercept is at
the point (—1, 0). The y intercept is at the point (0, f (0)) = (0,-1).

2) Since total fixed cost is a constant quantity, average fixed cost will steadily
fall as output increases without t becoming zero.

Check Your Progress 5

1) The function can be written f(x)= ax’ +c, where a= 1 and c= 4. Since a
is— 1, the graph is reflected across the x -axis. Since c = 4the graph is
translated up 4 units. So, the graph of y =— x°+ 4 is the graph of y = x°
reflected across the x-axis and translated up 4 units. Now you draw the
graph.

2) The cubic function is y =x

3) f(x)=1/x 1s a discontinuous function. Either it has a value at which f(x) does
not exist or has an asymptote. It is discontinuous at x=0 because f(x) is
undefined there. The discontinuity is visible in the graph.

fed

Check Your Progress 6

1) The rectangular hyperbola in general is defined as a hyperbola which has
orthogonal asymptotic lines.

2) Price elasticity equal to unity.

3) Hint: write the standard form of a hyperbola with horizontal transverse axis.
Check Your Progress 7

1) A curve in two dimensions on which the value of a function f(x, y) is a
constant.

2) The following figure may be seen. The number beside each curve is the
value of the function to which it corresponds. The level curve for the value
Oconsists of the axes.

i

— — = ———
—
cut

— — ae ==
I

ha

Z
\

A level curve is defined as a set, and indeed some level curves of some
functions are not" curves" at all. In the given function the value of f is 1
for all values of xand y. As a result you get straight lines, not curves.
Moreover, the level curve of this function for the value 2 is empty as there
are no values of (x,y) such that f(x,y)=2.

4.12 EXERCISES

Q1. Find the vertex and intercepts of y= 3x’+x—2 and graph; identify the vertex
and the axis of symmetry.

Ans. To find the y-intercept, set x equal to zero and solve:
y = 3(0)°+ (0)-2=0+0-2=2
Then they-intercept is the point (0,—2). To find the x-intercept, set y
Equal to zero, and solve:
0=3x7+x-2
0=(3x-2)(x+1)
3x—2=0 or x+1=0
x= 2/3 or x1
From the above, the x-intercepts are at the points (1, 0) and (7/3, 0). The

axis of symmetry is half way between the two x-intercepts at (-1, 0) and
at(“/3, 0).

The complete answer is a listing of the vertex, the axis of symmetry, and
all three intercepts, along with an ice, neat graph:

Coordinate
Geometry and
Representation
of Functions

147
Review of Basic
Mathematics

The vertex is at ("/6, 23) 12), the axis of symmetry is the line x = "6, and the
intercepts are at (0,2), (-1,0),and(7/3,0).

Q2. Let y=x'—13x7+36. Draw its graph.
Ans. This is a positive even power ("to the fourth"), so the graph will be upon
both ends. Factoring the polynomial, we get y=(x+3). (x —3) (x+2)

(x-2), so the zeroes (x-intercepts) are—3, —2, 2, and 3. If you plot a few
other points on your T-chart, it will be no trouble to graph this:

x y=x'—-13x°+36
-4 84
-2.5 -6.19
-] 24
36
1 24
2.5 -6.19
4 84

Li nit tit it

TTI

Graph of y=x*—13x7+36
Q3. A quadratic function is given as y=x°—6x+5. Draw its graph.

Ans. We need to plot more than three points to get the correct shape. Find the
intercepts, which in this case are at (1, 0), (5, 0), and (0, 5); find the vertex,
which in this case is at (3, —4).Remember that parabolas look like
"smilies", not like straight lines. So, we want to plot a few more points:

148
Table: Chart of y=x"+6x+5 Coordinate
Geometry and

Representation
x y= x*+6x+5 of Functions
0
1
3 -4
5 0
6

Graph of y=x’+6x+5
Q4. Sketch the graph of f(x)=(x-1)°+3

Ans. We need to pick values of x to plug-in. Here are the function evaluations.

x f(x) (x,y)
-| -7 (-1, -7)
0 0 (0,0)
| | (1,1)
2 2 (2,2)
3 9 (3,9)

You can sketch its graph now.

Q5. Sketch the graph of the following piece wise function.

_ —x7+4ifx<1
g(x)=

2x if x>1
Ans. Recall that graphing piecewise functions are like graphing several

functions at once, except we are only going to graph them on very

specific intervals. So, we will graph the following two functions,
149
