y = f(x)

Scalar function of one variable

X — Independent variable

(argument/input of a function)

y — Independent variable (value of function)

y = f(X4,X9) Scalar function of two variables
X4,X9 — Independent variables
(arguments/inputs of a function)
y — Independent variable (value of function)

dy y', F(x) Derivative of first order of function y = f(x)

dx 7 7

d*y tn Derivative of second order of function y = f(x)

dx

Oy Of(X4,x2) Partial derivatives of first order for function

0x; OX y =f(X4,X2) with respect to variable x i= 1,2

°F (x 4X2) a(x 4,X2) Partial derivatives of second order for function

Ox; OX; ax? y = f(Xx4,X2)
i 67F( X4,X9) 674( X4,X9 ) | Hessian, symmetric matrix of partial derivatives of
5 2™order for function y = f(x4,X>)
oxt OX4 0X2 me
H (X4, X92 ) ~1 9 2
O°T(X4,X2) O° T(X4,X2)
OX2 0x4 oxs
df(x) Value of a derivative of one variable function at point
dx X=X x
Cf (x4, Xp) Value of a derivative of one variable function at point
X = (X4,X2)
OX) |g 1:42
(p x) q Spe Scalar product of two vectors p,x €R?
i=1
det(A)or | Al Determinant of matrix A

de(x',x*) = $ fs - ef

Euclidean metric (distance)

d(x'|x?) = max x -»?\j
i=1,2

Non-Euclidean metric (distance)

.

Euclidean norm

|x| — max |x;|! Non-Euclidean norm
i=12 |
t=0,1,2... Time as discrete variable
t € [0;+00) Time as continuous variable

V f,gradf, Gradientof functionf, Vf = (cfox1,...,cfoxn)

10

SOME LETTERS OF THE GREEK ALPHABET (AND
CORRESPONDING SYMBOLS) YOU MAY ENCOUNTER

Symbol Greek Alphabet | Symbol | Greek Alphabet
a Alpha 0 Theta
B Beta A Lamba
y Gamma 1 Pi
O Delta o Sigma
é Epsilon Xx Chi
4 Psi HM Mu
Pp Rho a) Omega

11
ignou
THE PEOPLE'S
UNIVERSITY

BLOCK 1

REVIEW OF BASIC MATHEMATICS

Unit 1
Unit 2
Unit 3
Unit 4

Fundamental Concepts of Mathematics
Overview of Basic Methods of Mathematics
Relations and Functions

Co-ordinate Geometry and Representation of
Functions

13
ignou
THE PEOPLE'S
UNIVERSITY

UNIT 1 FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS OF
MATHEMATICS

Structure

1.0 Objectives
1.1 Introduction
1.2 Set Theory
1.2.1 Concept of Set
1.2.2 Notations
1.2.3 Forms of Set Representation
1.2.4 Relationships Between Sets
1.2.4.1 Notations, Definitions and Examples
1.2.4.2 Establishing Set Relationships
1.2.5 Some Special Sets: Universal Set, Null Set, Power Set, Convex Set
1.2.6 Quantifiers and Logical Symbols/ Operators
1.2.7. Some Conceptual Clarifications and Explanations
1.2.7.1 Difference between the Concepts of ‘Relation’ and
‘Operation’
1.2.7.2 Operations on Sets: Union, Intersection, Difference,
Complementation
1.2.7.3 More Clarifications

1.3. Numbers: From Natural to Complex
1.3.1 Some Standard Number Sets
1.3.2 R, The Set of Real Numbers
1.3.3. Real Number Intervals
1.3.4 Complex Numbers
1.3.5 Number Miscellany
1.3.6 Properties of Real Numbers as Ordered Field

1.4 Decimal Representation of Rational and Irrational Numbers
1.5. Real Number Exponentiation

1.6 Let Us Sum Up

1.7 Key Words

1.8 Answers/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises

1.9 Exercises

1.0 OBJECTIVES

After going through this unit, you should be able to:

e differentiate between concept, term, notation and definition of number;

e explain the concept of set;

e use set notation;

e find relations on sets;

e apply set operations; 15
Review of Basic
Mathematics

16

e differentiate between the concepts of ‘relation’ and ‘operation’ on sets;

e discuss relations and operations on numbers and their properties;

e define various types of numbers;

e apply operations on them; and use their properties in numerical problem
solving;

e express real numbers, including irrational numbers, as decimal numbers;

e apply rules of exponentiation of numbers.

1.1 INTRODUCTION

The discussion in the unit is centred on the two foundational concepts of
Mathematics, viz. (1) number, the basis of conventional mathematics; and (11) set,

the basis of modern mathematics.

Let us first understand the concept, term/name, notation/symbol, and system of

the number.

Fig. 1 (a) Fig. 1 (b) Fig. 1 (c)

Number Concept: when one views Fig. l(a) as different from Fig. 1(b), and
views Fig. 1(b) as similar to Fig. 1(c), then one has number-sense, the idea/
concept of number (of at least up to 2). The number sense/concept tells one that
despite so many common features that both figures Fig. 1(a) & Fig. 1(b) have,
e.g., both are about horse(s), and even about black horses, they are in one sense
different. Similarly, about figures Fig. 1(b) & Fig. 1(c), despite having so many
differences—Fig. 1(b) being picture of actual black horses, but Fig. 1(c) being
picture of marble white elephants (toys)—the two figures have something in
common, viz. ‘twoness’. The ‘twoness’ is a concept.

Number name/term: for the number of horses in Fig. 1(b), there are different
names/terms in different languages: ‘two’ in English, ‘’ in Hindi, ‘zwei’ in
German, ‘@)60or(h)’ or ‘Zrantu’ in Tamil.

Concept & Term: the word ‘term’ is used for the name of a concept.
For example, the terms ‘two’ and ‘’ represent the same concept of ‘twoness’.

For this concept, even in English, other terms like ‘pair’, ‘couple’, and even
‘twin’ may be used in some contexts. On the other hand, the term ‘bank’ may
refer to two different concepts, viz. the one in context of a river, and the other in
context of ‘the place where money is deposited’ etc.

Numeral/Number-Notation/Number-Symbol: For the number ‘six’, various
known notations include ‘6’, ‘VI’, and ‘&’. Thus 6 is actually name of a number,

1.e., it is numeral, and not a number. But it is incorrectly called a number.
In Mathematics, it is a practice to call the numerals as numbers. We will also
generally use the term number, instead of the actual one the numeral.

Term, notation and definition: One of the mathematical terms is ‘square root’;
the corresponding notation/symbol is V. And the definition of square-root is ‘For
a given number x, its square-root y is a number which satisfies the equation y x

y= x, where the meaning of ‘x’ or multiplication is already known’

Numeral system (or system of numeration): We have heard of various number
systems (more precisely, numeral systems), e. g., decimal number system,
Roman numeral system, binary number system. For example, the decimal
number ‘47’ may be represented as ‘XZP in Roman numeral system, and as
‘101001 in binary number system. The same expression may represent different
numbers in different number system. For example, the expression ‘111’
represents ‘One hundred & eleven’ in decimal number system, ‘seven’ in binary
number system, and ‘three’ in ‘unary number system’.

The term ‘Number System’—against the term ‘Numeral system’—is different,
and will be discussed later.

1.2 SET THEORY

Conventionally, the concept of number and geometric concepts like ‘straight
line’, triangle’ and ‘square’. have been the most fundamental, and the very first
of the concepts discussed in introductory mathematics. Since almost the middle
of the previous century, the concept of ‘set’ is considered as the most
fundamental concept of mathematics and all other concepts, including even those
of counting numbers and geometrical shapes, are discussed in terms of set.

1.2.1 Concept of Set

Set is a basic concept like ‘point’, & ‘’straight line’ in geometry and like
‘number’ in arithmetic, and hence, should be left undefined. However, in view of
the fact, that ‘set’ is now-a-days considered as one of the most fundamental
concepts in mathematics; to make a beginning in new mathematics, we just give a
sort of working definition, and define some elementary operations on sets to be
frequently used in the subsequent discussion.

Roughly, a set may be considered as a collection of things or entities, like names
of animals, names of books, names of numbers, names of geometrical shapes, or
any mixture of these. Any entity in a set is called its member, or its element.
Further, in a set, no member is repeated more than once. Also, the entities must
be distinctly identifiable. For example, as the drops of water in a glass cannot be
distinctly identified, therefore drops of water in a glass do not form a set.

More formally, we take a set as a well-defined collection of objects. What is
meant by ‘well-defined’ needs to be understood clearly. A collection is said to be
well-defined, if (i) entities included in it are distinctly identifiable, and, (ii) if we

Fundamental Concepts
of Mathematics

17
Review of Basic
Mathematics

18

pick up any distinctly identifiable entity in the world, then we should be able to
tell whether the picked-up entity is in (i. e. belongs to) the collection or not. For
example, let us consider the collection of all those students of IGNOU who
enrolled in 2021 for M.A. (Economics) program. This is a _ well-defined
collection, and hence, a set. But if we say the collection of some of those students
of IGNOU who enrolled in 2021 for M. A. (Economics) program, then, it is NOT
a set. Also, if we say ‘collection of all drops of water in this glass’, then it is
NOT a set, because, as mentioned earlier, a ‘drop of water’ is not distinctly
identifiable. Thus, not any collection is a set, only a well-defined collection is a
set.

Let us look at a well-known example of a collection which is not well-defined,
and hence is not a set:

A small village has only one (male) barber, who shaves all those, and only
those males, who do not shave themselves. Let X be the collection of all the
villagers shaven by the barber. Then, it is not possible to tell whether barber
belongs to X or not. This is so because, if the barber as a villager shaves
himself, then he cannot be shaven by the barber. Similarly, if he, as a villager
does not shave himself, then he must be shaven by the barber. Thus, it is not
possible to tell whether the barber is in X or not. Hence, X is not a well-defined
collection, and thus, not a set.

1.2.2 Notations

Like most of the mathematical concepts, sets have special notation. For
illustration, the notation {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9} is used to denote the set of all
decimal digits, viz., 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

The notation for a set has at the leftmost position a left brace, denoted by ‘?’,
followed by one of the elements, say 0, then a comma and a blank-space, next
another element say 1, followed by a comma and blank-space, and so on, till the
last element is written, which is followed by the right-brace, denoted by ‘}’.
Generally, a set is given a name, e. g., in this case the name of the set may be
Num-Digits, then we write Num-Digits= {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}. Any distinct
name—the name which has not been used earlier for naming any other set—may
be assigned. However, generally, name assigned is mnemonic (i. e., name
assigned should be helpful in remembering its contents or members).

Member/element of a set is what is included, except commas, within braces. For
example, 0 is a member, or element, of Num-Digits, 5 is a member of
Num-Digits etc. Instead, we may also say 0 belongs to Num-Digits, 5 belongs to
Num-Digits etc. However, we say 35 does not belong to Num-Digits.

Notation for member is the symbol €, called epsilon. It is used to denote
membership of a set. For the above example of Num-Digits, we will write
0 € Num-Digits, 9 € Num-Digits etc. Similarly, if we have a set called Vowels,
with Vowels = {a, u, e, 0, 1}, then e € Vowels, u € Vowels ETC. Whenever x is a
member of the set X, or equivalently, when x € X, then we also say ‘x belongs to
X’. The notation for ‘is not a member of or for ‘does not belong to’ is €. For
example, for the definition of Num-Digits given above, 35 € Num-digits.

Convention for notation of sets and elements: generally, set names start with a
capital letter, e. g. X, Y, N, Num-Digits, Value. And members, or elements are
denoted by small letters, e. g. a, b, x, y etc. However, it is not at all binding; we
may use small letters for set-names and capital letters for elements/members.

Extension of Set Notation: the problem with the set notation mentioned above,
arises when the number of elements in a given set is either very large or infinite,
because then it is quite difficult or even impossible to specify all the elements for
using the notation. In such cases, if there is some pattern among the elements,
then only some initial members are mentioned followed by triple dots (...)._ For
example, the set of numbers, each of which is less than 10,001 and is also square
of some integer, may be denoted by {0, 1, 4, 9, ..., 100, 121, ..., 400, ...,
10000}, or even more briefly by {0, 1, 4, 9, ..., 10000} etc. It may be named
asSq_int_less_10001.

1.2.3 Forms of Set Representation
The following two are well-known forms for denoting sets:

1) Tabular or roster form: The notation, so far used for denoting a set, is called
tabular or roster form. In this form, each of the elements/ members, or
enough members to indicate a pattern must be included within braces. The
notation is quite convenient if the number of members is a small number.
However, the notation has problems, specially, in the case of large sets.

ii) Set-builder form: The other notation is called set-builder form. Consider
again the set Sq_int_less_10001. Every element of it has two properties: (a) it
is square of an integer and (b) it is less than 10001.

The set-builder form uses these properties to denote the set as follows
Sq_int less _10001= {x: x= y’, y is an integer, and x < 10001},

The notation above states that the members of the set Sq_int less _1000/ are x,
where (‘where’ is denoted by ‘:’ or ‘|’) x satisfies three conditions: x= y’, y is
an integer, and x < 10001.There may be shades of differences in the set-builder
notation. For example

The set Decimal _ digits = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9} may be denoted as
Decimal digits = {x:x €Nandx< 10}; OR
Decimal _ digits = {x EN: x < 10} etc.

The set-builder notation is quite convenient if the properties satisfied by all the
members can be easily described, even if the set has very large number or
infinite number of members.

Fundamental Concepts
of Mathematics

19
