--- Page 12 ---
 
 
 
158 
India’s Foreign 
Trade: Policy and 
Challenges 
4) Describe important measures taken under liberalised trade policy after 1991. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
18.5  FOREIGN TRADE POLICY OF 2015-20 
The business -friendly approach of trade policy is aimed at reinforcing the 
domestic industry and exposing firms in India to international competition. Along 
with market-friendly approach international trade is one of the priority sectors of 
the economy. After economic reforms the trade policy is now known as foreign 
trade policy. The duration of the policy is for five years (2015 -2020). The policy 
is revised every year effective from April 1 to March 31 next year. The policy of 
2015 was effective till March 31, 2020. But,  due to the prevailing Covid -19 
situation, it was extended twice. 
Objectives of the policy : The policy provides a framework for 
increasing exports of goods and services with the Make in India vision. The main 
objectives of the policy are to: 
i) Ensure economic growth and generating employment by providing access to 
raw materials, components, intermediates inputs, and capital goods required 
for production. 
ii) Strengthen agriculture, manufacturing and services sector. 
iii) Incentivising exports through stakeholders who strive for achieving 
international standards of quality. 
iv) Adopting a strategy of promoting both traditional and sunrise 
sectors including exports of services. 
v) Simplify the process of ease of doing business by reducing transaction costs 
and time, thereby making Indian exports more globally competitive.  
vi) Increase India’s share of global trade from 2.1 percent to 3.5 percent and 
double exports to $900 billion by 2020. 
Salient features of the policy : The special features of the policy are the 
following: 
i) Focuses on improving India’s exports performance in existing 
markets/products and exploring new markets/products. 
ii) Consolidates a range of export incentives with different eligibility criteria 
into two schemes:  
iii) the merchandise exports from India scheme (MEIS), and  
iv) Services exports from India scheme (SEIS). 


--- Page 13 ---
 
 
 
159 
India’s Trade 
Policy v) Offers export incentives under these two schemes in the form of duty credit 
scrip’s, which can be used by exporters to pay import duties. The scrip’s 
are fully transferable, which means that if an exporter does not need them, 
they can pass them on to another. 
vi) Reduces export obligation  from 90to 75 percent for capita l goods sourced 
from local manufacturers under the Export Promotion Capital Goods 
Scheme (EPCG). This will facilitate the import of capital goods for 
producing quality goods and services to enhance India's competitiveness. 
This scheme allows import of capi tal goods for pre -production, production 
and post-production at zero customs duty. 
vii) Allows manufacturers who are “status holders” (entrepreneurs certified by 
the DGFT as having helped India become a major export player) to  self-
certify their manufactured goods as originating from India. This helps them 
qualify for preferential treatment under various bilateral and regional trade 
agreements.  
viii) Promotes the  paperless processing  of various DGFT licenses and 
applications.   
ix) MSMEs clusters  will have focused interv entions to increase exports. 108 
MSMEs clusters have been identified to boost exports. 
x) Niryat Bandhu  Scheme for  mentoring budding exporters through 
counseling, training, and outreach programs. 
xi) For the optimal utilization of resources, all the stakeholders have to be in 
close association with, Customs, ECGC, Banks, and concerned Ministries. 
xii) Duty-Free Import Authorisation (DFIA) under which duty -free import of 
inputs like fuel, oil, energy sources have been allowed for the production of 
export goods. 
xiii) Round-the-Clock Customs Clearance 24*7 has been made available at 19 
seaports and 17 air cargo complexes. 
xiv) Single Window Interface has been launched to facilitate the easier perusal 
of business. Under this scheme imports are enabled to electronically l odge 
Integrated Declaration at a single point only with Customs. The necessary 
permissions are obtained from other regulatory agencies without physically 
approaching them. Further, a single -window system has been introduced to 
facilitate the export of perishable agricultural produce to reduce the costs of 
transportation and handling. 
xv) Outlines extended incentives for SEZs in India. 
xvi) Seeks to integrate the government’s Make in India and Digital India 
initiatives. 


--- Page 14 ---
 
 
 
160 
India’s Foreign 
Trade: Policy and 
Challenges 
xvii) Effort to resolve complaints and trade disputes  between exporters and 
importers, a new chapter on ‘Quality Complaints and Trade Disputes’ has 
been incorporated into the policy. 
In sum, the focus of the policy is to support both the manufacturing and services 
sectors, with a special emphasis on improvin g the ‘ease of doing businesses’. It 
described the market and product strategy and measures required for trade 
promotion, infrastructure development and overall enhancement of the trade 
ecosystem. 
Evaluation of policy (2015 -2020): Country’s inherent econom ic strengths 
through trade policies reforms indicate its standing as one of the most sought -
after destination for foreign investments in the world. Also, technological, and 
infrastructural development being carried out across the country augurs well for 
the trade and economic sector in the years to come. 
Procedural simplifications included online submission of most trade -related 
documents. Digital signature was also accepted. These are significant steps 
towards easing the formalities attached with conductin g business. A few other 
important steps include the option of communicating via email instead of hard 
copies of letters, maintaining an Exporter-Importer profile and keeping electronic 
copies of all documents for future requirements. 
On the whole, there ha ve been wide -ranging changes in India’s trade policy in a 
bid to lower trade costs. There are other complementary reforms, especially with 
regards to FDI and exchange rate.Protectionist policies notwithstanding, trade 
and related reforms are important for improvements in efficiency in production as 
well as result in welfare gains (Sengupta and Roy, 2018).  
Despite having some very positive points in its favour, the policy carries some 
criticisms: 
i) In 2019, a WTO dispute settlement panel, acting on USA’s comp laint, said 
India’s export subsidy provisions  violate WTO rules and must be withdrawn. 
These include tax incentives under the MEIS and SEIS. 
ii) This aspect reinforces the growing view in India that the country needs 
to move away from subsidies and think of other ways to help its exporters.     
iii) A prevailing belief in India is that  free trade agreements (FTAs) haven’t 
worked for it. An important example of this emerged in November 2020 
when India decided to not be a part of the Regional Comprehensive 
Economic Partnership (RCEP), the world’s largest FTA. Some economists 
believe that this decision deprives India a chance to be a major player in 
exports. 
iv) There is some concern with respect to GST implementation, especially with 
regards to high and multiple rates of taxation and the credit for input duty and 
related refund.  


--- Page 15 ---
 
 
 
161 
India’s Trade 
Policy v) The volume and rate of growth in the external sector has brought into focus 
physical infrastructure constraints relating to power, transport, and 
communications. 
vi) There has been lack of full understanding of trade policy and its potential 
benefits, a poorly developed manufacturing sector, unsatisfactory results from 
regional trade agreemen ts, and constrained relationships, including with its 
main trading partners. 
18.5.1  Services Trade Policy  
In an effort to give special support to services exports, a new scheme for 
encouraging service exports and permitting them the import of capital goo ds at 
concessional duty was introduced in the Export -Import Policy update in 1994. 
Trade in services is a growing area. In the contemporary world with the advent 
and growth of technology services trade has assumed tremendous importance. 
Services became sig nificant in overall global trade, with the growth of 
international supply chains and improvements in communications and transport 
technology. Several services contribute to improving competitiveness, with large 
multiplier impact on economic activities. 
Policy related to trade in services is nothing but needs complementarity to goods 
policy by having corresponding regulatory regime.  A sound growth of trade in 
services requires increasing role of regulatory policies. Therefore, policies that 
improve the perf ormance of services assume major importance. There are 
number of areas where action is required to improve services related trade 
policies for India. 
18.5.2  Recalibrating India's Foreign Trade Policy 
Against the prevailing economic, political, social and external environment, it is 
the time now for India to look afresh its foreign trade policy. India faces 
significant challenges in the area of trade policy the global economic slowdown, 
increasing prote ctionism, the stalled mega -trade deals that could in time be 
revived, and perhaps more important, its own domestic preoccupations.  
In the context of trade policy, Singh and Kelkar (2022) have suggested that 
“major initiatives need to be supplemented by an  institution that conducts 
competent research-based trade policy analysis, taking account of its overlap with 
investment policy and industrial policy. A specialised institution is required, 
similar to the US International Trade Commission (USITC) or Austra lia's 
Productivity Commission (earlier, the Industries Assistance Commission)”. 
This is the opportunity to revive and empower India's Tariff Commission (TC) 
with a new role while including a number of its previous responsibilities. For 
example, the TC is supposed to identify (Singh and Kelkar, 2022): 


--- Page 16 ---
 
 
 
162 
India’s Foreign 
Trade: Policy and 
Challenges 
i) policy measures required to improve the competitive position of different 
goods and services in relation to other markets,  
ii) determinants of tariffs and effective protection,  
iii) implications of offers on tariffs m ade by India's trade partners in the context 
of trade negotiations, and  
iv) tariff changes taking place in competing economies, 
v) it should also investigate the interrelationship between, and impact of, tariff, 
monetary, fiscal and exchange rate policies on domestic prices,  
vi) the transition period required for phasing out tariffs for select industries, and 
other relevant issues. 
They further added that “the TC should address non -tariff measures in foreign 
markets, learn from the global experience for more effecti ve ways of creating 
efficiencies, evolve trade policies in the context of digital trade, and the usage of 
artificial intelligence (AI) tools to alert GoI about problems and opportunities 
likely to arise in specific export markets, as well as to help with r egulatory 
dialogues with different countries”. 
The proposed TC should be an integral part of India's developing trade and 
investment policy that makes the administration more open and integrated with 
world markets (Singh and Kelkar, 2022). India needs to remove trade restrictions, 
reduce tariffs and provide seamless connectivity at the borders to reap the trade 
benefits. 
Various regional and sub -regional free trade agreements (FTAs) are already in 
place or likely to evolve. To maximize opportunities within this environment, 
India will have to overcome significant trade policy challenges. Globalization  
produces both winners and losers. India’s trade policy needs to be bold and 
imaginative. Developments in global trade policy confront Indian policymakers 
with some hard choices. Trade and foreign policies must by and large be in sync. 
The world of trade policy requires give and take. India’s trade policy framework 
must be supported by economic reforms that result in an open, competitive, and 
technologically innovative Indian economy. 
The coverage and the content of trade policy has been increasing over time, 
which implies that the task of trade policy reform will remain a continuing one, 
rather a finished agenda. The existence of high trade deficit colours the 
perspective of both the Indian policy makers and the industry when they consider 
international trade policy issues. In a fast-changing trade scenario across the 
globe, a number of issues has emerged and they need attention of policy makers.  
Policymakers mu st work on issues to balance both domestic and international 
concerns, protecting the domestic industry in critical areas with policy 
interventions such as the production linked incentive (PLI) and simultaneously 


--- Page 17 ---
 
 
 
163 
India’s Trade 
Policy aiming for export promotion by participatin g in the global value chains. The new 
FTP must provide policy guidance and a direction for future trade agreements. 
The benefits of FTAs must be strongly communicated to the industry, so that it 
can prepare itself for future trade deals.  
Policies pertaining to export-import operations need to be fine-tuned according to 
the evolving global trade realities. There is a need for policy rationalisation to 
level the playing field under each type of manufacturing. India’s domestic policy 
action for promoting export must be based on external requirements. 
The upcoming FTP will address the challenges of emerging India through 
required policy interventions for green industries, start -ups, women 
entrepreneurs, and services sector exports. To this end, the key deliverables of the 
policy must be inclusive of the ambitions of an evolving India —fulfilling the 
growing demands of the country’s agricultural, manufacturing, and services 
sector while also creating a multiplier effect in the economy through enhanced 
trade (Singh and Singh, 2021). 
For India to achieve its policy objectives, the government and industry, 
particularly the manufacturing sector, must prepare for opportunities and greater 
engagement in an evolving multilateral trade arena. India’s priorities sho uld 
include taking policy measures to conform to global standards and supporting the 
WTO to prelaunch multilateral negotiations (Puri, 2017). 
India needs to work on a road map  that can bring its goods and services into 
conformity with the highest standards on technical barriers to trade; 
sanitary/photo sanitary rules; labeling, packaging, customs, clearance, and freight 
procedures; and the best or next -best environmental and la bor regulations. 
Undertaking action is required on the part of both government and industry and 
related stakeholders. 
Economic reform is always politically difficult, and the country still has a long 
way to go. More than change in policies India is struggl ing with change in 
attitude. This attitudinal change indeed constitutes a major challenge in India’s 
reform agenda (Puri, 2017). 
Singh, (2017) has emphasised that “there is a need for adopting trade policies in a 
coordinated manner, to simplify procedures,  make them more transparent, and 
reduce arbitrariness.  In this process, policy makers need to consider trade policy 
and domestic policy in an integrated manner, keeping in mind the continuing 
evolution of trade policy, emergence of new market conditions, and the growth of 
both formal and informal mechanisms which determine the opportunities and 
constraints in the global markets.A new approach, new institutional mechanisms 
and far -reaching integrated initiatives are thus needed for sustaining the 
momentum of growth”. 


--- Page 18 ---
 
 
 
164 
India’s Foreign 
Trade: Policy and 
Challenges 
18.5.3  Impact of trade policy reforms 
There has been considerable improvement in foreign trade (both exports and 
imports), balance of payment situation, foreign investment, inwards remittances, 
exchange rate flexibility and foreign exchange res erves. All these resulted in 
improved economic efficiency, giving consumers and businesses a wider choice 
of final goods and intermediate inputs to purchase. This, in turn, contributed to an 
acceleration of economic growth and reduction in poverty. 
A noteworthy feature of trade policy reform is the continuation of policy by 
every Government that came to power, both in the c onventional areas of trade 
policy, as well as in the new areas of trade policy that have emerged over the last 
three decades. The process of reform is still not complete and there is scope to 
further improve the situation. This possibility becomes even mor e tangible and 
feasible when one considers the fact that there is a significant gap between the 
announced tariffs and the actual applied tariffs. The real effective exchange rate 
shows that despite the large fall in the nominal effective exchange rate, the  
competitive situation for India has not changed much (Singh, 2017). 
It is important to note that the pace of reform has not been uniform. At times, the 
reform process became disquietingly slow because of various constraints. Many 
structural factors like g eography and institutions affect long term economic 
development, but it is worthwhile to remember how farsighted political 
leadership and good economic policies can significantly influence the fate of 
nations. India is not alone in the world in finding these in short supply. 
One important aspect of trade policy reforms in India is the pace of the reforms 
differed significantly across capital goods, intermediate goods and consumer 
goods. The reduction in protection was much more drastic and faster for capita l 
and intermediate goods. In contrast, the consumer goods sector remained 
protected for much of the 1990s. Trade policy reforms have significant positive 
impact on productivity yardstick of manufacturing performance. 
To liberalize trade, the industrial pol icy package involved, inter alia, the 
dismantling of the import licensing systems on virtually all intermediate inputs 
and capital goods; the lowering of tariffs by capping peak tariff rates and by 
rationalizing the tariff structure by reducing the number of bands; the devaluation 
of India’s national currency— the rupee—against the dollar, and the introduction 
of a dual exchange rate; the gradual phasing out of heavy government 
intervention in the key sectors of insurance, banking, telecommunications, and 
infrastructure; and the piecemeal opening up of the services sector to private 
domestic and, increasingly, foreign investment (Alessandrini et al, 2009). 
The effects of the tariff reductions on the introduction of new imported products 
and varieties are large and result in significant welfare gains for the economy, as 
measured by the decline in the exact price index. Moreover, the tariff reductions 
also led to the introduction of new domestic products. The intuition behind these 


--- Page 19 ---
 
 
 
165 
India’s Trade 
Policy results is straightforward: I ndian businesses and policy makers had complained 
for years that restrictions on the imports of important inputs held back domestic 
production and lowered the quality of the domestically produced products. The 
trade liberalization relaxed these constraints . The Indian trade liberalization 
resulted in the import of new products and varieties that were important. 
18.6 FOREIGN TRADE POLICY 2023 
The Foreign Trade Policy (FTP) 2015 -20 along with the initiatives of current 
government such as “Make in India”, “Digital India” and “Skills India” to create 
an “Export Promotion Mission”, promoted the diversification of India’s exports 
basket by helping various sectors of the Indian economy to gain global 
competitiveness.  FTP 2015 -20 which was to end in 202 0 extended due to 
COVID pandemic and volatile geopolitical scenario till March 2023. Policy 
changes were being undertaken since 2015 even without announcement of a new 
FTP responding dynamically to the emerging situations. The Foreign Trade 
Policy 2023 provided the policy continuity. 
Foreign Trade Policy (2023) is based on these 4 pillars:  
i) Incentive to Remission,   
ii) Export promotion through collaboration - Exporters, States, Districts, Indian 
Missions,  
iii) Ease of doing business, reduction in transaction cost and e-initiatives and  
iv) Emerging Areas – E-Commerce Developing Districts as Export Hubs and 
streamlining SCOMET (special Chemicals, Organisms, Materials, 
Equipment, and Technologies) policy. 
The FTP 2023 aims at process re -engineering and automation to facilitate ease of 
doing business for exporters. It also focuses on emerging areas like dual use high 
end technology items under SCOMET, facilitating e -commerce export, 
collaborating with States and Districts for export promotion. FTP 2023 is 
introducing a one -time Amnesty Scheme for exporters to close the old pending 
authorizations and start afresh.  
The FTP 2023 encourages recognition of new towns through “Towns of Export 
Excellence Scheme” and exporters through “Status Holder Scheme”. It is 
facilitating expo rts by streamlining the popular Advance Authorization and 
EPCG schemes and enabling merchanting trade from India. Reduction in fee 
structures and IT -based schemes will make it easier for MSMEs and others to 
access export benefits. FTP 2023 outlines the int ent and roadmap for establishing 
e-commerce hubs and related elements such as payment reconciliation, book -
keeping, returns policy, and export entitlements. 


--- Page 20 ---
 
 
 
166 
India’s Foreign 
Trade: Policy and 
Challenges 
Check Your Progress 3 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Point out the main features of India’s foreign trade policy 2015-20. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Do you think there is need for change in 2015-20 policy? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) In what ways foreign trade policy can be re-shaped? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
4) Should there be separate policy for services trade? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
5) List the focus areas of foreign trade policy 2023? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
18.7  LET US SUM UP 
In this unit, we discussed about India’s Foreign Trade policies over the years.  
Trade policy  refers to a nation’s formal set of practices, laws, regulations, and 
agreements that govern international trade practices, or imports and exports to  
foreign countries. Trade policies aim to strengthen the domestic economy. Some 
nations want to encourage more trade and pursue open trade policies with certain 
other nations, while others want to restrict trade and set policies that protect 
domestic indus tries from competition. Trade policies can have a number of 
benefits, including economic growth or lower costs of goods. 


--- Page 21 ---
 
 
 
167 
India’s Trade 
Policy Trade policies can include regulations, tariffs, and quotas. More than three 
decades ago, India was a country with very high tariffs, m ultiple and complex 
systems of control on both imports and exports, and exchange rate controls that 
had created an unhealthy economic situation. Permits were not the only barrier to 
imports. There were high rates of tariff on goods in the late 1980s.Econom ic 
growth was slow. The growth rate prior to reforms —so-called Hindu rate of 
growth—was just 3 to 4 percent overall and much slower on a per capita basis. 
The reform of this system initiated in 1991 marked a more transparent and less 
complex system, with r educed controls and established less ad -hoc policy 
framework, as India moved towards more open markets. External sector reforms 
since 1991 amongst others showed significant reductions in tariff rates and their 
dispersion. 
India began to make changes in its  economic policy from July, 1991. The SEZ 
Act was enacted in 2005 to re -vitalise export production. Compared to goods, 
services trade policy issues and related disciplines have been considered much 
later in time. While the trade policy covers both imports and exports, its primary 
objective is to  facilitate trade  by reducing transaction cost and time, thereby 
making Indian exports more globally competitive. 
Earlier trade policies were for three years. However, the government for the first 
time introduced 5 -year Export -Import Policy (EXIM) on  April 1, 1992  to 
dismantle various protectionist and regulatory policies and to accelerate India's 
transition towards a globally oriented economy. It is updated every year on 
March 31, and the changes come into effect from April 1. 
The foreign trade policy of 2015 -20 made number of important changes. 
MEIS and there is no condit ionality attached to scrip’s issued under the MEIS. 
For grant of rewards under MEIS, the countries have been categorized into  3 
Groups, whereas the rates of rewards under MEIS range from 2 percent to 5 
percent. Served from India Scheme  has been replaced wi th the  Service Exports 
from India Scheme ( SEIS). SEIS rewards to all service providers of notified 
services, who are providing services from India, regardless of the constitution or 
profile of the service provider. No conditionality attached to any scrip’s  issued 
under these schemes. Under SEIS the selected services would be rewarded at the 
rates of 3and 5 percent. 
India has recently concluded two free trade agreements with UAE and Australia. 
The real challenge in India, as in several other countries, is the lack of 
appreciation of the benefits of trade liberalization. This is mainly because of 
absence of political will. The new policy is eagerly awaited as the economy 
continues to reel from the effects of the pandemic and disruptions to inte rnational 
trade caused by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine worldwide. 
