--- Page 1 ---
 
 
 
147 
India’s Trade 
Policy  
 
 
 
BLOCK 8 
 
 
INDIA’S FOREIGN TRADE: 
POLICY AND CHALLENGES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Unit 18 India’s Trade Policy 
Unit 19 India’s Trade: Trends, Composition and 
Challenges 


--- Page 2 ---
 
 
 
148 
India’s Foreign 
Trade: Policy and 
Challenges 
BLOCK INTRODUCTION 
This block is on India’s Foreign Trade: Policy and Challenges . It has two units,  
i.e., Unit 18 - India’s Trade Policy , Unit 19 – India’s Trade: Trends, Composition and 
Challenges.  
Unit 18 starts with the concepts, nature and aims of trade policy and the basic tools of a trade 
policy. Then it moves on and explains the evolution of the trade policy in India. The 
evolution has been divided into two time periods i.e., up to 1990 and 1991 to 2014. The 
foreign trade policy of 2015-20 is being discussed at length separately.  
Unit 19 take the theme forward by presenting the pattern, direction and composition of 
India’s foreign trade. The challenges faced by the foreign trade of India are highlighted in the 
concluding part of the unit.  
 
 
 
 
 
  


--- Page 3 ---
 
 
 
149 
India’s Trade 
Policy UNIT 18  INDIA’S TRADE POLICY  
Structure 
18.0 Objectives 
18.1 Introduction 
18.2 Concept, nature and aims of trade policy 
18.3  Basic tools of trade policy 
18.4  Evolution of trade policy  
18.4.1  Trade policy up to 1990 
18.4.2  Trade policy 1991-2014 
18.5 Foreign Trade policy of 2015-20 
18.5.1 Services trade policy 
18.5.2 Recalibrating India's foreign trade policy 
18.5.3 Impact of trade policy reforms 
18.6     Foreign trade policy 2023 
18.7 Let Us Sum Up 
18.8 Key Words 
18.9 Some Useful Readings 
18.10 Answers/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
18.0  OBJECTIVES 
After studying this Unit, you should be able to:  
• Explain the concept of trade policy; 
• State various tools of trade policy; 
• Describe evolution of trade policy from 1950 to 2022; 
• Discuss the impact of trade policy; and 
• Identify the need of recalibration of trade policy. 
18.1   INTRODUCTION 
Business with foreign nations is not a new phenomenon in India. India is used to 
trade with foreign nations even in BC. During 1947 -90, the country pursued 
socialist pattern of development that has focus on inward-looking strategy of self-
reliance and state-led investment in heavy capital -intensive industries. India was 
 
 Contributed by  Ashish Gupta, Motilal Nehru College, Delhi University 


--- Page 4 ---
 
 
 
150 
India’s Foreign 
Trade: Policy and 
Challenges 
virtually a closed economy. However, even under controlled regime, country 
made progress towards industrialization, but inefficiency, bureaucratic process 
and rampant corruption did not allo w high growth rate of GDP. BoP crisis of 
1991 propelled systemic change in India’s economic policy. 
The economic reforms of 1991changed the direction of trade policy. The country 
embarked on a series of major trade reforms, progressively cutting tariff - and 
non-tariff barriers, phasing out quantitative restrictions, and easing limitations on 
the entry of foreign investment. Having made a good start trade policy has been 
encountering number of operational problems. In the contemporary world of 
value chains, where the focus has shifted from nations to firms, the formulation 
of trade policies has become increasingly complex. 
This unit discusses India’s trade policy, providing qualitative insights regarding 
the evolution of trade policy since independence and pr esents analysis of India’s 
trade policy reform since 1991.There is need for bringing improvement in policy 
and unit has analysed a road map for moving ahead.  
18.2  CONCEPT, NATURE AND AIMS OF TRADE 
POLICY 
Concept: Trade policy is established when a government sets standards and laws 
regarding international trade. The concept of trade policy relates to a national 
framework of laws, regulations, decisions, practices, and negotiating positions 
that governments adopt to ensure that national companies hav e to regulate the 
exchange of goods and services with a specific country or bloc of countries. Each 
nation determines its own standards for trading, including its tariffs, subsidies, 
and regulations. 
Some trade policies are codified into law; others are pa rt of the practices that a 
nation’s bureaucrats and diplomats follow. They are intended to reflect a national 
philosophy about international trade. Trade policy is also known as commercial 
policy or international trade policy or foreign trade policy. 
The nature of trade policy indicates the use of tariffs and other  trade barriers, 
such as restrictions on what goods can be imported or exported, and which 
countries are allowed to import or export goods to the home country. It 
encompasses tariffs (or subsidies ) as well as non -tariff barriers (quotas, 
antidumping duties) used by governments that are related to  trade among 
countries. The trade policies affect exchange rates, the availability of goods, and 
the prices that people pay for them, among many other economic factors. 
Aims of trade policy: Trade policies provide a number of economic benefits such 
as: 
i) importing and exporting,  
ii) foreign retaliation,  


--- Page 5 ---
 
 
 
151 
India’s Trade 
Policy iii) jobs creation,  
iv) emphasis on finding export markets for goods and services produced in the 
country, 
v) tariffs norms, 
vi) focus on protecting intellectual property,  
vii) setting standards that promote collaboration and reduce trade barriers,  
viii) establishing trade agreements and trade laws, 
ix) encouraging travel and tourism from other countries,   
x) limiting and heavily taxing imports to protect domestic industries. 
Many countries establish trade policies between the two extremes, adjusting them 
as the global economy and domestic political pressures change. A trade 
agreement occurs when two or more countries agree to the terms of trad e, which 
can include the amount of tariffs and quotas, among other terms.  
18.3  BASIC TOOLS OF TRADE POLICY 
In practice for implementation of trade policies some tools are needed. These 
tools are the following:  
Tariff measures: 
i) export taxes 
ii) import tariffs 
Non-tariff measures: These include quantitative restrictions like: 
i) antidumping measures,  
ii) sanitary phyto sanitary (SPS), and  
iii) technical barriers to trade (TBT) measures 
Quantitative restrictions (QRs) are: 
i) quotas 
ii) import restrictions and licensing policy 
iii) export restrictions 
India makes extensive use of trade policy instruments such as tariffs, export 
restrictions, export taxes, anti -dumping duties, and import licensing. Tariffs and 
quantitative restrictions have been important instruments of trade policy and 
played a crucial role in providing protection to domestic industry throughout the 
1980s and part of 90s. It is also widely held that the protective regime has been 
responsible for inefficiency in resource -use, which constrained the growth 
performance of Indian industries. 


--- Page 6 ---
 
 
 
152 
India’s Foreign 
Trade: Policy and 
Challenges 
The trading regime with respect to QRs began to be administered more liberally 
in the 1980s, but granting of licenses remained discretionary. India has reduced 
its QRs over time from the complex and extensive regime to one with much 
lower coverage, with simpler procedures and lower incidence. The QRs today are 
mainly to meet the “justifiable” objectives, and the regime is simpler and more 
transparent. This is not unusual or specific to India. Non -tariff measures are the 
new area of focus where reform is nee ded in many economies, large and small 
(Singh, 2017). 
India is the second -highest user of  anti-dumping, second only to the United 
States. Interestingly, with the reduction of tariffs, the use of anti -dumping has 
increased. India has been increasing tariffs on a number of items. For most cases, 
it has been argued that this is being done to manage the huge current account 
deficit the country runs with China. However, increasing tariffs may directly 
affect the competitiveness of products which are manufactured  using these inputs 
(Mukherjee, 2022). 
SPS and TBT measures  are collectively referred to as “standards”. These 
measures are far more pervasive than any other non -tariff measure, but the trade 
policy concern relates only to standards which are protectionist  (in general, 
standards are required to implement the objectives such as health and safety, 
technical compatibility, or environmental concerns).  
Check Your Progress 1 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Explain the concept of trade policy. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Why is trade policy needed? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Point out the tools of trade policy.  
 …………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 


--- Page 7 ---
 
 
 
153 
India’s Trade 
Policy 4) Which kind of tools are utilised more frequently after the advent of WTO?.  
 …………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
18.4 EVOLUTION OF INDIA’S TRADE POLICY 
The Department of Commerce, Government of India is the main agency to over 
view all the activities relating to foreign trade. It assumes the role of leadership in 
international trade organizations and devises commodity and  country-specific 
strategy in the medium term and vision for India’s foreign trade policy in the 
long run. 
India pursued a closed, import-substitution model of trade and development since 
1956.Prima facie , India’s trade policy and changes therein are driven by the 
industrialisation strategy, be it import substitution, export promotion or trade 
liberalisation. However, unlike in many industrialising countries, India’s 
transition has been from import substit ution to reforms in trade and investment, 
but not necessarily to export-led industrialization (Sengupta and Roy, 2018). 
During the past three decades, India has experienced an important process of 
trade reform. What started as protection during “planning for industrialization” in 
an economy with binding foreign exchange constraint in the 1950s, evolved to a 
relatively open economy with lesser barriers to trade. The process of change in 
the trade sector has been sequential over a relatively long period of ti me, the 
process being complemented by wide ranging policy shifts in other sectors of the 
economy (Sengupta and Roy, 2018). 
18.4.1  Trade Policy Up To 1990 
Right from the independence of 1947 the country adopted licensing system for 
trade and industrial pol icy. This is generally characterised as policy of license 
permit regime. Under this regime most imports and investment needed 
government permission. 
Trade policy till the 1970s primarily focused on regulating the utilization of 
foreign exchange through the use of quantitative restrictions. This was despite 
attempts to liberalise trade during the mid -1960s, which was short -lived. With 
balance of payments deterioration during that period, imports were again subject 
to quantitative restrictions. The trade regime in India was not only distorted with 
high tariff rates but there continued to be several exemptions as well as additional 
charges/surcharges at se veral points in time which continued to complicate the 
trading environment. These continued to remain as hurdles in the path of trade 
liberalization.  


--- Page 8 ---
 
 
 
154 
India’s Foreign 
Trade: Policy and 
Challenges 
The prolonged phase of industrial stagnation since the mid -sixties also led to a 
relook into the role of trade and related policies in the Indian economy through 
the Alexander Committee, the Hussain Committee and the Narasimham 
Committee. The policies towards the external sector reforms in India, which 
followed industrial decontrol, have moved in two directio ns: the reforms relating 
to tradeables and exchange rate reforms since the 1980s (Sengupta and Roy, 
2018). 
In the pre -90 period, India’s policy regime for imports was complex and 
cumbersome. There were different categories of importers, several types of 
licenses and alternative ways of importing. The 1980s saw changes in the 
external and the industrial sector in matters pertaining to licensing for scale and 
technology as well as quantitative restrictions on imports and tariff rates. 
Reforms in the trade sec tor aimed at export promotion by reducing distortions in 
the economy. Towards reforming trade, quantitative restrictions (QR‟s) on 
imports were eliminated and replaced with tariffs, the tariff structure was 
rationalised, and trade procedures were simplifie d. After the mid -1980s, the list 
of capital goods to be imported under the open general license was expanded. 
Replenishment licenses for import of capital goods were introduced and its scope 
was enlarged and made more flexible during the period. Import dut ies on 
machinery were rationalised since then. Since the mid -eighties, trade policy 
making was for a longer period (three -year policy to start with) to bring in 
stability in the regime.  
18.4.2  Trade policy 1991-2014 
India’s attempt at trade liberalizatio n in the 1980s and 1990s resulted in overall 
changes in the trading regime with substantial lowering of tariffs and near 
abolition of import control except for a few groups of industries on grounds of 
health, environment and defense. Additionally, the trad e policies of 1997 -98 and 
2003-4 attempted to further consolidate the trade liberalizations of 1991 -92. A 
directional change took place opening the economy to trade and foreign 
investment under policy of economic reforms. In this context, it is worth 
recalling how far India has moved towards liberalized trade policy. 
Trade policy reform was an important part of the economic reform initiated in 
1991. This became the focus for substantive liberalization from the very 
beginning of the reform process. Since the  macroeconomic policy regime created 
an economy that was expensive and often inefficient, export promotion was 
sought to be achieved through micro-level strategies (Khanna, 1997). 
Das (n d) has observed that “trade policy reform in the 1990s, given its eco nomy 
wide impacts, was considered as a key component of the reform process initiated 
in India. Such reforms were conceived to contribute to improved economic 
performance in the industrial sector as well as the overall economy”. The 1990s 
brought about comprehensive trade liberalization encompassing abolition of non -


--- Page 9 ---
 
 
 
155 
India’s Trade 
Policy tariff barriers, reduction of peak tariff rates and dispersion along with devaluation 
of the rupee. 
The policy decision was taken that the import of all production inputs, as distinct 
from finish ed consumer goods, should be liberalized. Capital goods, 
intermediates, components, and industrial raw materials were almost entirely 
thrown open for import at the option of the manufacturer himself or by the trade, 
for stock and sale. The underlying logic  was that if the Indian industry was to 
come of age and build up competitive production capability, it should be allowed 
access to the best capital equipment, instrumentation, and raw materials and 
components without having to knock on the doors of the imp ort-licensing 
authorities. The broad area of consumer goods was, however, restricted on 
balance of payments considerations. The elaborate listing of items in different 
lists such as "Banned," "Negative," "Limited Permissible," and "Canalized" was 
pruned drastically (Khanna, 1997). 
Moreover, since the reform process also involved a paradigm shift from an 
administrative micro level policy regime to a generalized market driven policy 
frame, the importance of the exchange rate as a determinant of trade flows would 
have to increase in the post reform period. 
Prior to the launching of reforms, the negative list of exports consisted of five 
categories, namely, prohibited list, licensable list, ceiling list, canalized list, and 
the conditional list. Simplify ing trade documentation and introduction of 
electronic trading concepts have been introduced. There has to be long term 
stability in the policy and transparency, including procedural simplicity. To 
achieve the stability, a five -year Export -Import Policy wa s announced for the 
period 1992-97. 
Trade policy reform since then is a journey that transformed not just trade policy 
framework, but also the evolution of several domestic policies. As a measure of 
economic reform, India had to take a number of initiative s towards liberalised 
trade policy and they are as under:  
i) devalued the rupee,  
ii) moved toward a flexible exchange rate, 
iii) current account convertibility, 
iv) dismantled the license raj that had blocked imports and made exports 
uncompetitive,  
v) unshackling constraints on domestic investment that limited competition.  
vi) opened the economy to foreign investment.  
Systemic changes were made in the import -substituting industrialization strategy. 
Some external forces were helpful in continuing the process of reform. In 199 9, 
the reform of India’s  trade policy  received a boost when a World Trade 
Organization ruling required India to dismantle remaining quantitative 


--- Page 10 ---
 
 
 
156 
India’s Foreign 
Trade: Policy and 
Challenges 
restrictions on imports of consumer’s goods. India’s trade policy reform paved 
the road for a: 
i) Major reduction of average tariffs, tariff peaks. Bulk of the tariff lines (86 per 
cent) are “non -agriculture”, where 90 per cent of the t ariff lines are between 
zero and 10 per cent. India’s tariff reduction led to the simple average tariffs 
being only about one-tenth that of the level in 1990-91. 
ii) Simplification of the tariff and quota regimes. The tariff regime being much 
simpler than it w as in 1991.The tariff regime is considerably less arbitrary 
today. 
iii) Removal of several import restrictions.  
The Agri Export Zones (AEZ) were allowed to be set up, following Exim Policy 
2002- 07, to provide comprehensive services package including provision  of 
pre/post-harvest treatment and operations, plant protection, processing, 
packaging, storage and related research & development etc. These AEZs would 
provide end -to-end development for export of specific products from a 
geographically contiguous area, p roviding a comprehensive package of services. 
A service provider in AEZs shall have the facility to move or shift the capital 
goods within the zone provided accurate record of such movements is provided. 
Following the Foreign Trade Policy 2010 -15, a Grieva nce Redressal Committee 
(GRC) was proposed to be set up for quick redressal of trade and industry and to 
boost export of perishable items via Agricultural and Processed Food Products 
Export Development Authority (APEDA). 
The Market Access Initiative to pro mote select Indian products and brands in the 
global market was introduced during 2002 -07. The scheme is formulated on 
focus product -focus market approach to evolve specific strategy for specific 
market and specific product through market studies/surveys. Assistance would be 
provided for enhancement of export through accessing new markets or through 
increasing the share in the existing markets. The scope of this initiative changed 
to Focus Product (FPS) and Focus Market (FMS) schemes in 2006. While FMS 
is to offset high freight cost and other externalities to select international markets 
with a view to enhance India’s export competitiveness in these markets. 
Following the EXIM policy of March 2000, the Assistance to States for 
Development of Export Infrastructure and Allied Activities (ASIDE) scheme was 
introduced in 2002.Trade reforms and related policies for state -level export 
promotion were aimed at improving supply capability, which were also expected 
to provide an expanding base of manufacturing producti on for exports as well as 
become more efficient. 
Singh (2017) has highlighted the fact that “any discussion on trade policy 
reforms in India is incomplete without a comment on the political economic 
aspects behind such wide -ranging shifts. Even though trade and related sectoral 
reforms were unilateral to  start with, the multilateral institutions including the 


--- Page 11 ---
 
 
 
157 
India’s Trade 
Policy World Bank, the IMF and the WTO have contributed to the liberalization process 
since the 1990s. India’s trade policy making is also dependent on global 
imperatives”. 
In a bid to reduce procedural com plexities, the Government of India had 
committed to the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) in 2013, which 
includes the publication and notification via internet details of import -export and 
transit procedures, and related fees and charges in accessible  form. The Union 
Budget of 2014 -15 announced an Indian Customs Single Window Project to 
facilitate trade which envisages that traders will electronically submit their 
customs clearance documents at a single point with customs.  
The exchange rate of rupee was overvalued, which priced out country’s goods 
out of world markets, keeping exports at just 5 percent of GDP. The foreign 
exchange earnings were very low which did not give scope for accumulating 
foreign exchange reserve.  As a result, purchase of new technology and capital 
goods on world markets were hindered where “ease of doing business” was not a 
priority.  
Harsha Vardhana Singh (2017) has highlighted the fact that “trade policy was 
considered as a tool of industrial policy  within a system of extensive controls 
which created time -consuming multiple layers of decision -making and delays, 
and increased costs which affected trade, investment and the efficiency of 
domestic operations”.  
Check Your Progress 2 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  What is the role of Department of Commerce in conduct of foreign trade of 
India? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Trace the evolution of India’s trade policy. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Why were so many controls on foreign trade up to 1990? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
