--- Page 9 ---
 
 
 
8 
Classical Regression 
Model 
 explain the concept of data generation process; and 
 transform intrinsically linear models and interpret them. 
1.1 INTRODUCTION 
Econometrics is a specialised branch of economics which is concerned mostly 
with empirical verification of economic theory. Let us see how econometrics is 
different from other branches of economics such as mathematical economics or 
economic statistics. Mathematical economics usually presents economic theory in 
mathematical form. It does not bother about empirical measurement of economic 
theory. Econometrics on the other hand is mainly concerned with empirical 
verification of economic theory. In doing so, econometrics makes use of the 
mathematical equations suggested in mathematical economics. Economic 
statistics deals with collection, processing and presentation of data. Statistics 
provides many theories on the basis of which inferences can be drawn. For 
example, the probability rules and sampling distribution are quite important in 
hypothesis testing. The application of these rules to economic theory through 
empirical research is a part of econometrics. 
In recent years theoretical developments in econometrics have been quite rapid. 
In fact, it is somewhat difficult to keep track of all these developments. The 
present unit serves as a foundation for the course. It begins with certain basic 
concepts and describes how econometric methods are applied to real life 
situations.  
1.2 NATURE OF ECONOMETRICS 
Econometrics is a branch of economics which deals with economic measurement. 
It may be defined as ‘the quantitative analysis of actual economic phenomena 
based on the concurrent development of theory and observation, related by 
appropriate methods of inference’ [Samuelson, Koopmans and Stone, 1954]. We 
should notice three issues being emphasized in the above statement. First, 
econometrics deals with quantitative analysis of economic relationships. Second, 
it is based on economic theory and logic. Third, it requires appropriate methods 
to draw inferences.  
1.2.1 Theoretical Econometrics and Applied Econometrics 
Econometrics has both theoretical side as well as applied side. Development of 
theoretical econometrics has been on two lines: (i) estimation methods, and (ii) 
test statistics. There are three broad estimation methods: (i) least squares method, 
(ii) maximum likelihood method, and (iii) method of moments. Under each of 
these methods, we have several estimation techniques. The least squares method 
was officially discovered and published by Legendre in 1805 and Carl Friedrich 
Gauss (1809) made substantial contribution to theoretical advancement of the 
least squares method. Under least squares method we have many estimation 
methods such as ordinary least squares, weighted least squares, generalised least 


--- Page 10 ---
 
 
 
9 
Introduction to 
Econometrics 
squares, indirect least squares, non-linear least squares, etc. We will discuss some 
of these methods in later Units of this course.  
In applied econometrics, we apply these theoretical methods and test statistics to 
data obtained from various branches of econometrics (such as industrial 
organisation, labour economics, financial economics, etc.). Very often, the 
distinction between theoretical econometrics and applied econometrics is blurred 
– there are several studies which have developed new econometric tools and 
applied it to empirical data.  
Through logic and experience economists have attempted to establish 
relationship between several variables. Movements in certain economic variables 
are explained in terms of changes in some other variables. For example, the law 
of demand states that as price increases the quantity demanded of a commodity 
decreases. As price of oilseeds increase farmers allocate larger land area for 
cultivation of oilseeds. You will find numerous examples of such relationships. 
Some of these are apparent while others are quite complex. As we do not know 
what exactly is happening we often make conjectures based on logic and our 
understanding of things.  
Due to differences in perception, often different researchers explain the same 
phenomenon differently. For example, historical data on macroeconomic 
variables of a country over a period of time are the same. Inferences drawn by 
researchers on the basis of the same data could be different! While a researcher 
with classical ideas may come up with the view that government intervention is 
ineffective, another researcher with Keynesian ideas may suggest the need for 
government intervention. Thus, the variables included in a model, the nature of 
relationship among variables, the assumptions made, etc. are quite important.  
Some of the economic relationships have been proved through empirical studies 
and validated under several situations. Some more are put forth as hypothesis and 
unequivocal conclusions are yet to be drawn. In both the cases, however, logic 
needs to be supported by empirical observation. An advantage with the subject 
matter of economics, unlike many other disciplines in social sciences, is that 
many of the economic variables can be quantified. This has helped in empirical 
measurement of economic variables and validation of economic theory.  
In applied econometrics we deal with empirical studies based on a sample. As 
you know, it is not possible to carry out a census due to constraints on budget, 
time and personnel requirements. We consider a single sample and estimate the 
econometric model (for example, a regression equation). Thus, the population 
regression function and sample regression function are different. From the 
estimates obtained from a sample we try to draw inferences about the population. 
Thus, statistical significance of the estimates is very important in econometric 
models.  
1.2.2 Econometric Models 
In economics we often use the term ‘model’. It refers to a simplified version of 
reality. It allows us to understand, analyse and predict economic behavior. An 


--- Page 11 ---
 
 
 
10 
Classical Regression 
Model 
economic model can be for a microeconomic agent such as household or firm. 
For analysis of production behavior of a firm we assume the existence of 
production function such as Cobb-Douglas or translog, which determines our 
supply curve. We assume the structure of the market (perfect competition or 
oligopoly, for example), which decides the demand curve. By combining the 
supply curve and the demand curve, we obtain estimates of equilibrium price, 
output, capacity utilization, etc.  
In macroeconomics, economic models represent the behavior of the economy as 
a whole. Here, we identify relevant macroeconomic variables (such as income, 
output, expenditure, investment, saving, exports, etc.) and establish a relationship 
among them. The relationships among these variables may be expressed through 
diagrams or mathematical equations. There could be macroeconomic models 
without mathematical expressions, but these may not be precise.  
An economic model is based on certain assumptions. These assumptions are 
required so that minute details are ignored and essential elements are included. 
Let me illustrate the point through an example. In the case of a firm, it is assumed 
that there are two factors of production, viz., capital and labour. We combine all 
types of labour into a homogeneous category – we do not distinguish between a 
manager and a worker in the field! Similarly, while describing an indifference 
curve we overlook the type of households – the behavior of a rich household 
would be different from that of a poor household; or the behavior of a household 
in a rural area would be different from that of a household in an urban area. We 
ignore such details because our objective is to analyse the behavior of households 
to changes in prices and income. If our objective is to identify the changes in 
consumption pattern across households, we would require a different model and 
consider such differences. 
In the Keynesian model, to take an example from macroeconomics, we consider 
aggregate variables such as total consumption, total investment, government 
expenditure, and net exports. We determine equilibrium level of output for the 
economy as whole. We ignore the behavior of households and firms. Several 
growth models (such as Harrod-Domar model or Solow model) assume that the 
economy consists of just one sector – there is an aggregate production function, 
which gives the relationship between aggregate output (that is, total output) with 
aggregate inputs (that is, total capital and total labour). It may sound unrealistic, 
but the objective of these growth models is to analyse the equilibrium conditions 
for economic growth, saving ratio and population growth. These models ignore 
the details, but the broad conclusions drawn are helpful in policy formulation. A 
question such as, ‘why growth rate differs across countries?’ can be addressed 
through these growth models. 
1.2.3 Important Steps in an Econometric Study 
Every econometric study is different in the sense that its objective, methodology, 
and database are different. The variables included in a study and the methods of 
estimation of parameters vary across studies. There are, however, certain 


--- Page 12 ---
 
 
 
11 
Introduction to 
Econometrics 
procedures and sequence which all econometric studies follow. Let us discuss the 
important steps involved in empirical studies applying econometric methods.  
a) The first and foremost issue in econometrics is the statement of 
hypothesis. Hypothesis is an assertion or claim made about a property or 
characteristic of a population. Thus, hypothesis is a tentative statement 
about the research questions of the study. It could be in the form of a 
simple statement or it could be in the form of relationship among 
variables. Hypothesis is drawn from economic theory or some logic built 
by the researcher.  
b) The second step is transformation of the above hypothesis into 
mathematical equation(s). This is our economic model that we want to 
study. Hypothesis is stated in the form of ‘null hypothesis’ and 
‘alternative hypothesis’. Null hypothesis, as you know, present a 
statement to the effect that there is no relationship between variables. 
c) The third step is the collection of relevant data required for the study. 
Data could be from primary or secondary sources. Usually, data are 
entered into a worksheet (such as an excel sheet). Data pertains to the 
variables included in the model. 
d) Estimation of parameters of the economic model. This requires selection 
of appropriate method of estimation. Broadly, there are three methods of 
estimation: (i) least squares method, (ii) maximum likelihood method, and 
(iii) method of moments. We will discuss about these methods in 
subsequent Units. Based on the probability structure of the data available 
to us, we select the appropriate estimation method. 
e) Testing of the hypothesis mentioned in the first step above. Such testing is 
based on the value of test statistic (such as t-ratio) or the p-ratio. 
Basically, it amounts to statistical significance of the estimates obtained 
by us. 
f) Interpretation of the economic model. On the basis of inferences drawn 
through hypothesis testing, we interpret our results.  
Check Your Progress 1 
1)  What is an econometric model?  
...........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................... 
2)  Distinguish between theoretical econometrics and applied econometrics. 
...........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................... 


--- Page 13 ---
 
 
 
12 
Classical Regression 
Model 
3) Write down the important steps to be followed in an econometric study. 
...........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................... 
...........................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................... 
1.3 SPECIFICATION OF A REGRESSION MODEL 
In economic theory we attempt to establish relationship among variables. Such 
relationship could be of two types: deterministic and stochastic. Let us focus on 
the case of two variables: Y and X. As you know from your statistics course, the 
variables in a regression model are asymmetrical – one variable is dependent ( Y) 
while the other is independent (X).  
1.3.1 Deterministic Relationship 
The simplest relationship between two variables, Y and X, could perhaps be a 
linear deterministic function given by 
𝑌௜ = 𝛽଴ + 𝛽ଵ 𝑋௜  ( 𝑖 = 1,2 … … …𝑛)   … (1.1) 
In the above equation, X is the explanatory variable (or, independent variable) 
while Y is the explained variable (or, dependent variable). You should note that 
the subscript i represents the observation number, i ranges from 1 to n, the 
sample size. Thus, 1Y  is the first observation of the dependent variable, 1X  is the 
first observation of the independent variable, 5X  is the fifth observation of the 
independent variable, and so on. 
Equation (1.1) implies that Y is completely determined by X and the parameters  
𝛼and 𝛽.Suppose we have parameter values 𝛽଴ = 3 and 𝛽ଵ = 0.75, then our linear 
equation is𝑌௜ = 3 + 0.75 𝑋௜.From this equation we can find out the value of Y for 
given values of X. For example, when X = 8, we find that Y = 9. Thus, if we have 
different values of X, then we obtain corresponding Y values on the basis of 
(1.1).Further, if iX  is the same for two observations, then the value of iY  will 
also be identical for both the observations. A plot of Y on X will show no 
deviation from the straight line with intercept 𝛽଴  and slope 𝛽ଵ. 
If we look into the deterministic model given by (1.1) we find that it may not be 
appropriate for describing economic interrelationship between variables. For 
example, let Y = consumption and X = income of households. Suppose you 
record your income and consumption for successive months. For the months 
when your income is the same, does your consumption remain the same? 
Certainly not, because there are many other factors that decide your monthly 
consumption expenditure. The point we are trying to make is that economic 
relationships involve certain randomness. We cannot include all the determinants 
of monthly consumption expenditure in a regression model. For the same 𝑋௜, we 
observe different 𝑌௜ values. 


--- Page 14 ---
 
 
 
13 
Introduction to 
Econometrics 
1.3.2 Stochastic Relationship 
The word ‘stochastic’ means ‘random’ or ‘involving certain probability’. 
Accordingly, stochastic relationship between X and Y involves certain 
randomness. In equation form it is given by  
𝑌௜ = 𝛽଴ + 𝛽ଵ 𝑋௜ + 𝑢௜      …(1.2) 
where𝑢௜is the stochastic error term. In equation (1.2) for the same value of X we 
obtain different values of Y due to the presence of the variable u.  In the income 
consumption relationship, two individuals having the same income can have 
different expenditure. Stochastic relationship describes real life situation more 
accurately. Two employees having the same monthly salary in an office can have 
different monthly expenditure levels. One employee may have a bigger family to 
support, may have an ailing mother, or an altogether different lifestyle!  
Remember that the right-hand side of (1.2) has two parts, viz., i) deterministic 
part (that is, 𝛽଴ + 𝛽ଵ 𝑋௜), and ii) stochastic or randomness part (that is, 𝑢௜ ). 
Equation (1.2) implies that even if 𝑋௜ remains the same for two observations, 
𝑌௜need not be the same because of different value of 𝑢௜. An implication of (1.2) is 
that if we plot ( X,Y) on a graph paper the observations will not remain on a 
straight line.  
It is assumed that the stochastic error term follows certain assumptions: 
(i) 𝐸(𝑢௜) = 0      … (1.3) 
While the error is positive for some observations, it is negative for the 
others. It implies that on an average, the error is zero. In other words, 
the sum of errors across the population is zero.  
(ii) 𝐸(𝑢௜
ଶ ) = 𝜎ଶ      … (1.4) 
The variance of the error variable is 𝜎ଶ . It is constant across the 
population. For example, the variance of household consumption 
expenditure is the same for rich households as well as poor 
households.  
(iii) 𝐸൫𝑢௜𝑢௝൯ = 0 for 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗    … (1.5) 
There is no correlation between the error terms for different 
observations in a dataset.  
(iv) 𝐸(𝑋௜𝑢௜) = 0     … (1.6) 
The explanatory variable is not correlated with the error term. This 
assumption is required for fulfilment of the properties of the 
estimators ( 𝛽መ଴ , 𝛽መଵ ) on unbiasedness and consistency. You will learn 
more about the relevance of this assumption in Unit 4. 
(v) 𝑢௜~𝑁(0, 𝜎ଶ )     … (1.7) 
The error variable 𝑢௜follows normal distribution with zero mean and 
𝜎 standard deviation. For a given value of 𝑋, there is a whole range of 
values of 𝑢 and a particular value is selected randomly.  


--- Page 15 ---
 
 
 
14 
Classical Regression 
Model 
The above assumptions are called the classical assumptions. These assumptions 
indicate the ideal conditions regarding the error variable. In empirical studies, 
some of the above assumption may not be fulfilled. We will discuss the 
implications of these assumptions in Unit 4. 
1.3.3 Inclusion of Error Variable 
In the previous sub-section we discussed about the statistical properties of the 
error variable ( 𝑢௜). Now, let us find out the logic behind inclusion of the error 
variable in the regression model. There are at least three reasons for inclusion of 
the stochastic error term in a regression model.  
First, in real life the relationship among variables is complex. Regression model 
is a simplification of such relationships. It is not always possible to include all 
relevant variables in the functional relation. For example, we assume that price is 
the sole determinant of demand for a product. In fact, several variables related to 
demand, such as individual tastes, population, income, etc. do influence the price 
of a product, which are omitted from the function. Some of these variables have 
positive effects while others have negative effects. The net effect of these omitted 
variables in the equation is represented by the error term. If the effect of these 
omitted variables is small, it is reasonable to assume that the error term is 
random. 
Second, we do not know the exact functional form. Suppose we hypothesize a 
linear relationship among the variables, while it is a quadratic one. There is no 
means of knowing what the true relationship is. We just take one functional form 
on basis of our logic and reasoning. Certain error creeps into the model, because 
of the wrong specification of the functional form. Presence of an error term 
absorbs all such misspecification issues.  
Third, another source of error is the sampling error. For instance, consider 
equation (1.2) as a household-consumption function, where Y is consumption and 
X is income. Even if equation (1.2) is a correct relationship, the sample we 
randomly choose to examine may turn out to be predominantly poor families. 
Thus, estimates of 𝛽଴  and 𝛽ଵ from this sample group may not be as good as the 
estimates obtained from a representative sample. 
1.4 DATA GENERATION PROCESS 
By now you must be clear that econometric studies require specification of the 
model in quantitative terms, involving variables and parameters. In this context, 
selection of relevant variables and specification of the functional form are quite 
important.  
Let us examine the consumption-income model to illustrate the above point. We 
observed that monthly consumption expenditure of two households having the 
same monthly income (say, Rs. 50000) are different – while one household 
consumes Rs. 35000, the other household consumes Rs. 48000.After considering 
its income level and other determinants of household expenditure, a household 
decides on its consumption level. What are these other determinants of household 


--- Page 16 ---
 
 
 
15 
Introduction to 
Econometrics 
expenditure? These could be family size, health status, culture, tastes, etc. all 
these determinants collectively determine the consumption expenditure of a 
household. Do we know all the relevant variables? Is it possible to include all 
these variables in our regression equation?  
While specifying a consumption function, it is not possible to include all the 
determinations of consumption expenditure. Further, as pointed out in Sub-
Section 1.2.2, an econometric model is a simplification of reality. Thus, in an 
econometric model we include the important variables only.  
From our sample survey (or, from the secondary data sources) we obtain data. A 
major issue before us is our ignorance of the data generation process (DGP). 
Such data can be seen as a joint probability distribution with certain probability 
distribution. As mentioned above, we do not know all the factors that influence 
the consumption decision of a household. We make some guesswork, based on 
our experience and logic. Accordingly, we assume a probability structure for the 
data.  
Data generation process (DGP) reflects the reality that is taking place. As DGP is 
not known to us, we try to uncover the secrets through our econometric models. 
There are two approaches to econometric modelling: (i) general-to-specific, and 
(ii) specific-to-general. In the first approach we consider a general model by 
including many variables. Subsequently, we exclude the irrelevant variables. In 
the second approach, we begin with a simple model and keep on adding variables 
based on our logic. Although, there is no consensus on the approach to be 
followed, researchers prefer the general to specific approach.  
There are four steps in the process of building an econometric model: (i) we 
guess the data generation process, (ii) we assume the associated probability 
theory, (iii) we use that theory for empirical evidence, and (iv) we revise the 
model if the results do not match our data. We continue with the above four steps 
in an iterative manner till we get satisfactory results. 
We make several trial and error on the functional form. If the data fails to fit our 
model, it implies we do not understand the data generation process. We try with 
another model. If the data fits our model, we still do not understand the data 
generation process! It just implies that our model was good in this case.  
You should recall how a hypothesis is formulated. It is a statement based on 
theory or logic. If we could reject a null hypothesis, we confirm that the dataset 
does not hold true (recall Karl Popper’s theory of falsification discussed in MEC 
109).  
1.5 FUNCTIONAL FORMS  
Usually, we consider a linear regression equation in our econometric model, as it 
is easier to estimate and interpret such models. Linear regression models are 
linear in parameters and linear in variables. Linear regression models, however, 
may not be appropriate in all cases; there could be situations where the regression 
model is non-linear.  


--- Page 17 ---
 
 
 
16 
Classical Regression 
Model 
1.5.1 Classical Regression Model 
The two-variable linear regression model is the simplest functional form that we 
consider. It is given by  
𝑌௜ = 𝛽଴ + 𝛽ଵ 𝑋௜ + 𝑢௜       …(1.2) 
where  Y is the explained variable (also called dependent variable) 
 X is the explanatory variable (also called independent variable) 
 u is the error variable (also called white noise in time series analysis) 
When we include more than one explanatory variable in the regression model, we 
call it the multiple regression model. In notations, a multiple regression model is 
given by 
𝑌 = 𝛽଴ + 𝛽ଵ 𝑋ଵ + 𝛽ଶ 𝑋ଶ + ⋯ + 𝛽௞ 𝑋௞ + 𝑢    … (1.8) 
In equation (1.8) there is one explained variable ( Y) and k explanatory variables 
(𝑋ଵ , 𝑋ଶ … , 𝑋௞ ). We have omitted the sub-scripts for simplicity.  
When the error variable u fulfils all the classical assumptions specified at 
equations (1.3) to (1.7), we call the regression model a ‘classical regression 
model’. Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) method is frequently used to estimate 
parameters of the classical regression models.  
1.5.2 Intrinsically Linear Cases 
Certain non-linear equations can be transformed into linear equations by taking 
logarithms. Two intrinsically linear models are used frequently: (i) semi-log 
model, and (ii) log-linear models. 
(a) Semi-Log Models 
Let us begin with a functional form as follows: 
𝑌௧ = 𝑒ఉ బ ାఉ భ ௑ ೟ା௨ ೟       … (1.9) 
This regression model, in its present form, is non-linear. Therefore, it cannot be 
estimated by OLS method. However, if we take natural logs of both the sides, we 
obtain 
ln𝑌௧ = 𝛽଴ + 𝛽ଵ 𝑡 + 𝑢௧       … (1.10) 
It transforms into a semi-log equation. It is called a semi-log model as one of the 
variables is in log form.  
If we take ln𝑌௧ = 𝑌௧
ᇱ, then equation (1.10) can be written as 
𝑌௧
ᇱ = 𝛽ଵ + 𝛽ଶ 𝑡 + 𝑢௧       … (1.11) 
Estimation of equation (1.11) is simple. The equation is linear in parameters and 
in variables. Thus, we can apply OLS method to estimate the parameters. The 
implication of the regression model (1.11), however, is much different from the 
regression model (1.2). 


--- Page 18 ---
 
 
 
17 
Introduction to 
Econometrics 
If we take the differentiation of the regression model 𝑌௧ = 𝛽଴ + 𝛽ଵ 𝑋௧ + 𝑢௧, we 
obtain  
ௗ௒
ௗ௧ = 𝛽ଵ         … (1.12) 
Equation (1.12) shows that the slope of the regression equation is constant. An 
implication of the above is that the absolute change in the dependent variable for 
unit increase in the independent variable is constant throughout the sample. If 
there is an increase in X by one unit, Y increases by 𝛽ଵ unit. 
Now, let us consider the regression model ln𝑌௧ = 𝛽଴ + 𝛽ଵ 𝑡 + 𝑢௧ . If we take 
differentiation of equation (1.11) we find that  
ௗ୪୬௒ ೟
ௗ௧ = 𝛽ଵ   
which means  
ଵ
௒೟
ௗ௒ ೟
ௗ௧ = 𝛽ଵ         … (1.13) 
An implication of equation (1.13) is that the slope of the regression model is 
variable. Thus, its interpretation is different from that of the regression model 
𝑌௧ = 𝛽଴ + 𝛽ଵ 𝑋௧ + 𝑢௧. 
For equation (1.13), we interpret the slope coefficient ( 𝛽ଵ) as follows: For every 
unit increase in X, there is 𝛽ଵ per cent increase Y. Thus, for a semi-log model the 
change in the dependent variable in terms of percentages. The semi-log model is 
useful is estimating growth rates. 
(b) Log-Linear Models 
Let us consider the following non-linear regression model 
𝑌 = 𝛽଴ 𝑋ఉ భ         … (1.14) 
This model will be intrinsically linear if it can be transformed into  
𝑌ᇱ = 𝛽଴ + 𝛽ଵ 𝑋ᇱ + 𝑢       … (1.15) 
Using the logarithm of each of the variable in equation (1.13), we get the 
following transformed equation:  
ln𝑌௜ = 𝛽଴ + 𝛽ଵ ln𝑋௜ + 𝑢௜      ... (1.16) 
The regression model given at (1.16) is called a log-linear model (because it is 
linear in logs of the variables) or double-log model (because both variables are in 
log form). 
Let us take differentiation of equation (1.16) with respect to ln𝑋௜  
ௗ (୪୬௒ ೔)
ௗ (୪୬௑ ೔)
= 𝛽ଵ        ... (1.17) 
A closer look at equation (1.17) shows that the slope parameter of (1.14) 
represents the elasticity between Y and X. This attractive feature of the log-linear 
model has made it popular in applied work. The slope coefficient 𝛽ଵ  measures the 
elasticity of Y with respect to X , that is, the percentage change in Y  for one per 
