--- Page 4 ---
CONTENTS 
BLOCK 1 TRADITIONAL APPROACHES TO 
MACROECONOMICS 
Page 
Unit 1 The Classical Approach 7 
Unit 2  The Keynesian Model 27 
Unit 3  Neoclassical Synthesis  54 
Unit 4  Open Economy Macroeconomics - I 70 
Unit 5  Open Economy Macroeconomics - II 81 
BLOCK 2 EXPECTATIONS AND MACROECONOMICS 
Unit 6 Inflation and Unemployment 94 
Unit 7  Rational Expectations 105 
BLOCK 3 INTERTEMPORAL DECISION-MAKING 
Unit 8 Consumption and Asset Prices 124 
Unit 9 Ramsey-Cass-Koopmans Model  137 
Unit 10 Overlapping Generations Model 153 
BLOCK 4 THEORIES OF BUSINESS CYCLES 
Unit 11 Traditional Models of Business Cycles 164 
Unit 12 Real Business Cycles  184 
BLOCK 5 LABOUR MARKETS 
Unit 13 Nominal and Real Rigidities 199 
Unit 14 Search Theory and Unemployment  221 
BLOCK 6 ISSUES IN MONETARY POLICY 
Unit 15 Central Banks and the Supply of Money 235 
Unit 16 Conduct of Monetary Policy  249 
Unit 17 Theory of Monetary Policy  262 
BLOCK 7 FISCAL POLICY AND MACROECONOMICS 
Unit 18 Fiscal Policy 278 
Unit 19 Fiscal Sustainability 292 
Glossary 305 


--- Page 5 ---
COURSE INTRODUCTION 
Macroeconomics analyses and establishes functional relationships among economy level 
aggregates. Aggregative analysis has assumed such a great significance in recent times that a 
prior understanding of macroeconomic theoretical structure is considered essential for proper 
comprehension of various issues and policies. Macroeconomics now is not only a scientific 
method of analysis but also a body of empirical economic knowledge. 
After going through this course a student is expected to  
 have an intuitive understanding of the theoretical developments in macroeconomics; 
 contrast among various schools of macroeconomic thought;  
 analyse real world issues with the help of macroeconomic theories; and 
 apply macroeconomic theory to empirical data. 
The course comprises seven blocks. 
Block 1, entitled Traditional Approaches to Macroeconomics , is somewhat introductory in 
nature. After explaining some basic concepts that are used frequently in macroeconomics and 
form building blocks of the subject, it presents the classical and Keynesian views on 
determination of output and employment in an economy. Subsequently, it presents a synthesis 
of the classical and Keynesian ideas through the tools of IS-LM curves. The block also deals 
with issues pertaining to open economy macroeconomics.   
Block 2, entitled Expectations and Macroeconomics, deals with issues such as inflation and 
unemployment. It traces the evolution of Phillips Curve – how it originated as a relationship 
between real and monetary variables; how it occupied a prime place as an analytical tool in 
Keynesian economics; and how it became irrelevant in the new-classical economics. In the 
course of discussion, this block deals with two important concepts, viz., adaptive expectations 
and rational expectations.   
Block 3, entitled Intertemporal Decision-making, analyses the behavior of economic agents 
such as households and firms in an inter-temporal framework. It discusses the Ramsey-Cass-
Koopmans model and overlapping-generations model. It also looks into issues such as the 
choice between work and leisure on the part of households.  
Block 4 , entitled Theories of Business Cycles , is devoted to the analysis of economic 
fluctuations in an economy, particularly the business cycles. It begins with traditional theories 
of business cycles and later moves on to real business cycles models with inter-temporal 
substitution and the propagation mechanism. 
Block 5 , entitled Labour Markets , discusses issues related to unemployment in the 
economy. Apart from presenting nominal and real rigidities, the block throws lights on search 
theories and unemployment. 
The subject matter of Block 6 is Issues in Monetary Policy . It deals with issues such as 
money supply, conduct of monetary policy, and theory of monetary policy. In recent years 


--- Page 6 ---
inflation targeting, policy rules, and dynamic consistency have been important concerns of 
policy makers.   
Block 7 , entitled Fiscal Policy and Macroeconomics , looks into the implications fiscal 
policy in an economy. Debt sustainability and Ricardian equivalence are two important issues 
discussed in this Block.  
