--- Page 76 ---
 
76 
 
Traditional Approches 
to Macroeconomics 
whereas payments for the same may be received six months later and hence may 
not be recorded in BOP of that year.  Therefore, in order to balance the BOP 
account an entry for errors and omissions is included.  
Even though the BOP always balances, we can talk about an overall BOP surplus 
or deficit. Overall BOP balance is obtained by adding the current and capital 
account balances. A country has a BOP surplus in the following cases: (i) there is 
current account surplus as well as capital account surplus; (ii) there is a current 
account deficit but a capital account surplus that is larger in magnitude; (iii) there 
is a current account surplus and a relatively smaller capital account deficit. There 
would be a BOP deficit, either when there is a deficit on both current and capital 
accounts or when there is a relatively large deficit in either one of the current or 
capital accounts.  
In the case of a BOP surplus there is an increase in the foreign exchange reserves 
of the country. In the case of a deficit, the stock of foreign exchange reserves is 
depleted.  Let us discuss this issue in details. 
Change in Foreign Exchange Reserves 
Apart from transactions made by private and government agents, the capital 
account of the BOP also includes official reserve transactions  that involve 
change in the stock of foreign exchange reserves held by the central bank. When 
there is a BOP surplus, the country experiences a net inflow of foreign exchange, 
leading to a correspondingincrease in foreign exchange reserves. In the case of a 
BOP deficit, there is net outflow of foreign exchange and a corresponding 
reduction in foreign exchange reserves. Thus, 
BOP Balance = Current Account + Capital Account (including errors and 
omissions) + Official Reserve Transactions = 0 
In case a country has a current account deficit (of say, – $15,000), but a capital 
account surplus that is smaller in magnitude (say, $12,000), then it has a BOP 
deficit (of –$3000) that leads to a decrease in foreign exchange reserves (by 
$3000). 
Note that a BOP surplus is recorded with a positive sign in the BOP, while the 
corresponding increase in reserves has a negative sign, so that the two add up to 
zero. Therefore in BOP accounts an increase in foreign exchange reserves 
appears with a negative sign whereas a decrease in reserves has a positive sign. 
4.3.2 Exchange Rate 
The exchange rate is an important concept in an open economysuch as India, that 
has transactions involving foreign goods, services and assets, whose prices are 
denominated in terms of foreign currencies. Throughout the following discussion 
we assume that the domestic country is India and the foreign country is the USA.  
Demand for foreign exchange arises whenever domestic agents purchase foreign 
goods, services or assets (i.e., imports and capital outflows); whereas, sale of 
domestic goods, services and assets to foreigners (i.e., exports and capital 


--- Page 77 ---
 
77 
 
Open Economy 
Macroeconomics-I 
inflows) constitutes the primary source of supply of foreign exchange. The 
market value of the exchange rate is determined by demand and supply in the 
foreign exchange market. However, often the official exchange rate may differ 
from its market value as you will see from our discussion on alternate exchange 
rate regimes. First we shall learn about various exchange rate concepts.  
Nominal Exchange Rates 
The nominal exchange rate ‘e’ can be defined as the number of units of domestic 
currency (Rupee) required forpurchasing one unit of foreign currency (dollar). 
For example, if Rs. 80 is required to buy one dollar, then the exchange rate e = 
Rs. 80 per dollar. Similarly, the exchange rate of the Indian rupee can also be 
defined in terms of other currencies, e.g., yen, euro, pound, etc.   
When the exchange rate ‘e’ rises (say, from Rs. 80 to Rs.82 per dollar), there is 
an increase in the price of dollars in terms of rupees and there is nominal 
depreciation of the rupee vis-à-vis dollar (and nominal appreciation of the dollar 
vis-à-vis rupee). When ‘e’ falls (e.g., from Rs. 80 to Rs. 78 per dollar), the dollar 
becomes cheaper in terms of rupees and there is a nominal appreciation  of the 
rupee (and nominal depreciation of the dollar vis-à-vis rupee). 
Real Exchange Rate 
While nominal exchange rates measure the rate of exchange between domestic 
and foreign currencies, the real exchange rate captures the rate at which domestic 
goods are exchanged for foreign goods. It isthe price of foreign goods in terms of 
domestic goods and is computed using the nominal exchange rate and prices of a 
comparable basket of domestic and foreign goods as bellow: 
 r = (e pf) / pd          (4.6)  
where‘e’ is the nominal exchange rate (rupees per dollar), p d denotes the 
domestic price level (in rupees) and p fdenotes the foreign price level (in dollars). 
‘e pf’ is the price in rupees of a foreign basket of goods and ‘p d’ is the price (in 
Rupees) of a comparable domestic basket.  
The real exchange rate between rupee and dollar reflects the price of goods 
produced in the USA relative to those produced in India. A rise in r means 
American goods become relatively more expensive vis a vis Indian goods and 
there is real depreciation  of the rupee; whereas a reduction in r makes Indian 
goods relatively more expensive and there is real appreciation of the rupee. The 
real exchange rate is often used as an index of a country’s international price 
competitiveness. In case a country faces real appreciation of its currency, 
domestic goods become more expensive and this can lead to a reduction in 
demand for exports. In contrast, a real depreciation of the currency can boost 
export demand.  
When domestic and foreign prices remain unchanged (that is, 
௣೑
௣೏
 is constant), a 
nominal depreciation (‘e’ rises) of the domestic currency causes a corresponding 
real depreciation (‘r’ rises). In this case the nominal and real exchange rates 


--- Page 78 ---
 
78 
 
Traditional Approches 
to Macroeconomics 
move in the same direction. However, prices may change simultaneously with 
exchange rates; e.g., an appreciation in nominal exchange rates (‘e’ falls), along 
with a large fall in domestic prices ( 𝑝ௗ
 falls) may lead to a real depreciation (r 
rises). So, ‘e’ and ‘r’ may also move in opposite directions.  
Exchange Rate Regimes 
The exchange rate regime of a country determines how its exchange rate is 
determined.  
Under a flexible (or floating) exchange rate regime , the value of ‘e’ is 
determined by the demand and supply of foreign exchange, without any 
government intervention. In this case the currency is on a clean float or pure 
float. That means the exchange rate is fully flexible and adjusts continuously to 
equate market demand and supply of foreign exchange, so there is no role for 
intervention by the central bank and hence no need of foreign exchange reserves. 
In this case BOP balance is attained via exchange rate fluctuations. That is, in 
case there is a BOP surplus (supply of foreign currency exceeds demand), the 
exchange rate appreciates (e falls, so that given prices, r falls, so foreign goods 
are relatively cheaper), X falls, M rises and NX falls (the current account deficit 
widens and BOP surplus is reduced), till BOP equilibrium is restored. Floating 
exchange rates lead to considerable volatility in exchange rates that may be 
unfavorable for exporters and importers and may have adverse impacts on 
domestic production, investment and employment. As such, ‘pure floats’ are 
rarely observed in practice.  
In most countries central banks maintain a stock of foreign exchange reserves 
and intervene and try to maintain the value of exchange rate within a certain 
band. Such exchange rate arrangements, widely prevalent across countries, are 
called a ‘managed float’ or dirty float. Intervention refers to the central bank 
buying or selling foreign exchange in an attempt to influence the exchange rate. 
In a managed float, the currency is allowed to float within a certain ‘target zone’ 
and the central bank stands ready to intervene (e.g., buy or sell dollars against 
rupees) whenever the exchange rate appears to breach the limits of this band. 
At the other extreme we have the system of fixed exchange rate, wherein the 
exchange rate is not freely floating, but is fixed by the government.  An 
important function of central banks in a fixed exchange rate system is to 
intervene in foreign exchange markets to keep the price of foreign exchange 
fixed at the pre-announced level. For this, central banks have to maintain 
adequate stock of foreign exchange reserves.  
Under a fixed exchange rate system, the fixed parity announced by the central 
bank may be revised at times; in this case a decrease in ‘e’ due to official 
intervention is called revaluation while an increase in ‘e’ by official intervention 
is called devaluation. In a world with few restrictions on international 
transactions in goods and assets, maintaining a fixed exchange rate poses an 
