--- Page 55 ---
 
 
 
55 
The Neoclassical 
Synthesis 
economy immediately. Thus, he focused on the short-run. He reasoned that an 
increase in aggregate expenditure (which represents aggregate demand) leads to an 
increase in output; it does not lead to rise in prices till full employment is reached. 
In view of above, price level is kept fixed in the simple Keynesian model. An 
implication of fixed prices is that nominal values and real values are the same. 
In this Unit we deal with a closed economy; there is no external trade. We begin 
with the derivation of IS and LM curves. Subsequently, we derive the AD curve 
from the equilibrium points of the IS-LM model.  
3.2 EQUILIBRIUM IN THE REAL SECTOR  
The aggregate expenditure (or, aggregate demand) of an economy is given by  
Y = C + I + G 
where Y is output (or, aggregate supply), C is consumption expenditure, I is 
investment expenditure, and G is government expenditure. 
The consumption function is given by  
𝐶 = 𝑎 + 𝑏 (𝑌 − 𝑇) = 𝑎 + 𝑏𝑌ௗ       … (3.1)   
where 𝑌ௗ is disposable income (i.e., Y – T). Here T is a lump sum tax levied by the 
government.  The investment function is given by 
𝐼 = 𝑐 + 𝑑𝑌 − 𝑒 𝑖         … (3.2)    
where 𝑖 is the rate of interest (there is no difference between nominal rate of 
interest and real rate of interest as price is kept fixed). Let us assume that 
government expenditure (G) is constant, and exogenously given. Thus,   
𝑌 = 𝑎 + 𝑏 (𝑌 − 𝑇ത) + (𝑐 + 𝑑𝑌 − 𝑒 𝑖) + 𝐺 ̅     … (3.3) 
On re-arrangement of terms in equation (3.3), we obtain  
𝑌 − 𝑏𝑌 − 𝑑𝑌 = 𝑎 − 𝑏𝑇ത + 𝑐 − 𝑒𝑖 + 𝐺̅  
Or, 𝑌 =
௔ା௖ାீ ̅ି௕் ത
(ଵି௕ିௗ )
−
௘
(ଵି௕ିௗ ) 𝑖      … (3.4) 
The IS equation, in its general form, is given by  
𝑌 =  𝛼 ீ (𝐴̅ − 𝑒𝑖)        … (3.4a) 
where 𝛼ீ =
ଵ
(ଵି௕ିௗ ) and 𝐴̅ = 𝑎 + 𝑐 + 𝐺̅ − 𝑏𝑇ത . 
In equation (3.4) we find an inverse relationship between Y and 𝑖. It implies that, 
as 𝑖 increases, there is a decrease in Y. In order to find out the slope of equation 
(3.4) you have to express it in terms 𝑖 and find out the slope 
ௗ௜
ௗ௒ . You can find out 
the slope of the IS curve as −
(ଵି௕ିௗ )
௘ . Depending upon the value of the parameters, 
the IS curve would be flatter or steeper. 
3.2.1 Derivation of the IS Curve 
In Fig. 3.1 we explain the relationship between Y and 𝑖 through a diagram. In Panel 
(a) of Fig. 3.1 we take aggregate expenditure (AE) on the y-axis and output (Y) on 


--- Page 56 ---
 
 
 
56 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics 
the x-axis. Let us assume that the economy is operating with AE0 while the rate of 
interest is 𝑖଴ .  The intersection of AE 0 with the 45଴  line at point ‘a’ is of utmost 
importance to us. Note that the 45଴  line in Fig. 3.1(a) indicates equality between 
aggregate demand (AE) and aggregate supply (Y), such that it corresponds to 
equilibrium in the economy. We plot this point ‘a’ in panel (b) of Fig. 3.1. In panel 
(b) we take interest rate (𝑖) on the y-axis and output (Y) on the x-axis.  
Panel (a) 
 
  AD 
       AE 1 
     b            AE 0 
     
      a 
 
 
             Y 0 Y 1  Y 
 
Panel (b) 
    i  
 
 
    i0          a 
    i1        b 
 
             IS 
     O  Y 0 Y 1               Y 
Fig. 3.1: Derivation of the IS Curve 
Suppose, there is a decrease in the rate of interest from 𝑖଴  to 𝑖ଵ . As a result of this, 
the level of investment in the economy increases and the new aggregate 
expenditure level rises to AE 1. The aggregate expenditure curve (AE 1) intersects 
the 45଴  line at point-b. Due to the increase in the aggregate expenditure, there is 
an increase in the equilibrium level of output from Y 0 to Y 1.  We plot point-b in 
Fig. 3.1(b) corresponding to output level Y1 and intertest rate 𝑖ଵ . When we combine 
points ‘a’ and ‘b’ we obtain a downward-sloping curve, called the IS curve. A point 
on the IS curve denotes equilibrium in the real sector (also called the goods sector) 
of the economy and there is equality between investment (I) and saving (S). Note 
that the real sector of the economy is at equilibrium on each and every point of the 


--- Page 57 ---
 
 
 
57 
The Neoclassical 
Synthesis 
IS curve. An implication of the above is that any point outside the IS curve shows 
disequilibrium in the real sector. In Fig. 3.2 we consider two such points ‘c’ and 
‘d’ which are not on the IS curve, and find out their implications.  
 
Fig. 3.2: Disequilibrium in the Real Sector 
At point ‘c’ in Fig. 3.2, interest rate is 𝑖଴  while output is 𝑌ଵ  . Notice that at 𝑌ଵ  level 
of output, the equilibrium rate of interest should be 𝑖ଵ . Thus, the actual rate interest 
is higher than what it should. As a result, the aggregate demand will decrease 
(largely due to decrease in investment) and the rate of interest will decline. It 
implies that at point-c, there is excess supply of goods in the market. We can 
generalize that any point which is above and to the right of the IS curve, indicates 
excess supply of goods.  
Let us look at point ‘d’ which is below and to the left of the IS curve. At point ‘d’ 
in Fig. 3.2, income is at Y0 but the rate of interest is at 𝑖ଵ . Since the rate of interest 
is lower than the equilibrium rate of interest, the demand for investment will 
increase. Consequently, the rate of interest will rise upward. Thus, at point ‘d’ there 
is excess demand for goods. We can generalize that at any point below and to the 
left of the IS curve, there is excess demand for goods.  
3.2.2 Shift in the IS Curve 
The IS curve depicts the relationship between income and interest rate. Therefore, 
any change in other parameters or variables will result in a shift in the IS curve. 
The position and the slope of the IS curve depends upon the value of the parameters 
in equation (3.4). If the IS curve is flatter, the economy is more sensitive to interest 
rate – a small decrease in interest rate will lead to a large increase in income. On 
the other hand, a steeper IS curve implies insensitivity to interest rate change. 
There are two exogenous variables in equation (3.4), viz., G and T. In equation 
(3.4) we assumed that government expenditure and taxes are fixed. Thus, changes 
in taxes and government expenditure will also result in shifts in the IS curve. Let 
us look into equation (3.4). An increase in the value of 𝐺̅  will result in an increase 
in the intercept; thus, there will be an upward parallel shift in the IS curve. An 
increase in 𝑇ത, on the other hand, will decrease the intercept and shift the IS curve 
downward to the left.  
