--- Page 85 ---
 
85 
 
Open Economy 
Macroeconomics-II offset the impact of the increase in foreign exchange reserves on the money 
supply.  
5.2.3 Equilibrium in Open Economy IS-LM Model  
As in case of a closed economy, macroeconomic equilibrium occurs at the 
intersection of the IS and LM curves as shown in Fig. 5.1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.1: “Macroeconomic Equilibrium in Open Economy IS-LM Model 
Note that at the equilibrium E,the rate of interest, i 0 = if, owing to the assumption 
of perfect capital mobility. The point E represents macroeconomic equilibrium in 
the sense that there is both internal balance (goods and money market 
equilibrium) and external balance (BOP equilibrium).  
The horizontal line BP that passes through the equilibrium rate of interest 
represents BOP equilibrium, in the sense that it represents interest rate – income 
combinations for which the current account surplus (deficit) is exactly offset by a 
capital account deficit (surplus). Note that here NX represents the current account 
balance. 
With perfect capital mobility, the BP curve is horizontal, as the slightest 
deviation of i from i f, would create BOP disequilibrium and trigger either infinite 
capital inflows or outflows. If i> i f, there will be a surge in capital inflows and a 
BOP surplus, since inflows would be higher than required for BOP balance, at 
any given level of income. Whereas, or any i < i f, there will be unlimited capital 
outflows and a BOP deficit.  That is, for any Y (say Y 0), there is BOP surplus at 
all points above BP and a BOP deficit at all points below BP.  
With imperfect capital mobility the BP curve would be upward sloping. As Y 
increases, M would rise, NX would fall and the current account deficit would 
widen. To maintain BOP balance therefore, i would have to increase to attract 
capital inflows and create a matching capital account surplus. With imperfect 
E 
i0 = if 
i 
IS 
Y0 
Y 
BP 
 LM ቀMഥ pൗ ቁ 


--- Page 86 ---
 
86 
 
Traditional Approches 
to Macroeconomics 
capital mobility, which occurs when there are restrictions on cross-border capital 
flows or when domestic and foreign bonds are imperfect substitutes, there can be 
a difference between iand i f. However, here we will only consider the case of 
perfect capital mobility.  
5.3 MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICIES UNDER 
 FLEXIBLE EXCHANGE RATE 
When a country has a flexible exchange rate regime, its exchange rate is 
determined by demand and supply in the foreign exchange market. We consider 
the case of a pure float , where there is no official intervention in currency 
markets and hence no role of foreign exchange reserves, with BOP equilibrium 
achieved via exchange rate fluctuations.  
5.3.1 Fiscal Policy under Flexible Exchange Rates  
Consider the open economy IS-LM model with perfect capital mobility and 
suppose the government follows expansionary fiscal policy in this set up as in 
Fig. 5.2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 5.2: Expansionary Fiscal Policy under Flexible Exchange Rates 
Initially the economy is at E 1 (see Fig. 5.2), where goods and money markets are 
in equilibrium and there is BOP equilibrium as well, with i 0= i f.  With fiscal 
expansion (or fall in tax rate t), there is an increase in G. The IS curve shifts from 
IS0 to IS 1 and the interest rises from i 0 to i 1 as the economy moves to the new 
equilibrium E1. However, with if remaining the same, the rise in domestic interest 
rate makes domestic bonds relatively more attractive and there is a surge in 
capital inflows, that leads to a BOP surplus (excess supply of foreign exchange), 
causing a currency appreciation (e falls). With given prices (implying prices 
remaining constant), a nominal appreciation leads to a real appreciation (r falls), 
reducing X, raising M and worsening the trade balance (NX falls). As a result 
aggregate demand falls and the IS curve shifts to the left. It shifts back all the 
way to IS 0, where once again i = i 0 = i f and output is back to Y 0.Note that at any 
other IS curve, e.g., IS 2, the domestic interest rate is still above i f (i2> if), so e, r 
i 
i0 = if 
i1
i2 E0 
E1 
Y0 Y1 
Y 
IS0 
IS1 IS2 
BP 
 LM ቀMഥ pൗ ቁ 


--- Page 87 ---
 
87 
 
Open Economy 
Macroeconomics-II 
and NX would fall and IS would shift further to the left. Therefore, we see that 
with flexible exchange rates, fiscal expansion is ineffective. It fails to raise output 
(the increase in output from Y 0 to Y 1 is only temporary), the trade balance 
worsens because of appreciation in the exchange rate (NX is lower) and the fiscal 
position deteriorates (G has increased or tax rate t has fallen). 
5.3.2 Monetary Policy under Flexible Exchange Rates  
We now examine the impact of expansionary monetary policy under a flexible 
exchange rate regime.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Fig. 5.3: Expansionary Monetary Policy under Flexible Exchange Rates] 
In Fig. 5.3 an increase in nominal money supply (from M 0 to M 1) shifts the LM 
curve outward from LM 0 to LM 1 and the economy moves from E 0 to E 1, as 
domestic interest rate falls from i 0 to i1.At i1 there is  internal balance (output and 
money markets are in equilibrium) but there is external imbalance (BOP 
disequilibrium) that triggers capital flows. Since i 1< i f, this triggers a capital 
outflow, leading to a BOP deficit (excess demand for dollars) and causing a 
depreciation of the nominal (e rises) and real exchange rates (r rises). As a result 
domestic goods become relatively cheaper, X rises, M falls and NX increases, 
and with higher external demand, the IS curve shifts to the right. This process 
continues till the IS curve shifts all the way to IS 3 and the economy is at E 3, 
where once again i = if and both internal and external balance are restored. At any 
other point (e.g., E 2 on IS 2, i2< if, so e and r would rise, NX would fall, moving 
the IS curve further to the right). 
This shows, that in complete contrast to fiscal policy, monetary expansion is an 
extremely effective policy tool in an open economy with flexible exchange rates 
i 
i0 = if 
i1
i2
E0 
Y0 Y1 
Y 
IS0 
IS3 
IS2 
BP 
E
E
E
Y3 
LM଴ ቀM଴ pൗ ቁ 
LMଵ ቀMଵ pൗ ቁ 
