--- Page 7 ---
 
 
UNIT 1 THE CLASSICAL APPROACH 
Structure 
1.0 Objectives 
1.1 Introduction 
1.2 Various Schools of Macroeconomic Thought 
1.3 Basic Features of Classical Theory 
1.4  Determination of Output and Employment  
1.5 Quantity Theory of Money  
1.6 Say’s Law of Market  
1.7 Classical Dichotomy  
1.7.1 AD-AS Equilibrium  
1.7.2 Neutrality of Money 
1.7.3 Saving-Investment Equilibrium  
1.8  Long Run vs. Short Run 
1.9  Let Us Sum Up 
1.10  Answers/ Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
1.11Some Useful Books/ Further Readings 
1.1 OBJECTIVES 
After going through the unit, you should be in a position to 
 bring out the salient features of classical economics; 
 analyse the classical approach to the determination output and employment; 
 explain the quantity theory of money and its implication on price 
determination;  
 explain the classical dichotomy in the economy and the neutrality of money 
in a classical system; and 
 describe the behavior of prices in the long-run and short-run.  
1.1 INTRODUCTION 
Being a student of economics, you must be aware that macroeconomic theory has 
evolved over time in response to the dynamic macroeconomic environment. 
Initially, during the nineteenth and early twentieth century, there was a consensus 
among economists and economic historians that an economy could run smoothly 
without much fluctuation in income, output and  employment. The perception 
 
 Dr. Jagannath Mallick, Independent Researcher, New Delhi writer 


--- Page 8 ---
 
8 
 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics 
was that there should be minimum state intervention in economic variables such 
as wages, prices and interest rates. The market forces (supply and demand) would 
take care of economic equilibrium in an economy. Such an assumption, however, 
is unrealistic – all governments have in place certain economic policies (such as 
monetary policy and fiscal policy) and they carry out amendments to these 
policies from time to time!  
Economic theory refers to a set of ideas and principles which are used to explain, 
analyse and predict certain ‘phenomenon’ or observable events. As you know, 
macroeconomic theory deals with macroeconomic phenomena, which are 
aggregative in nature. The need for a special branch of macroeconomics arises 
because what holds for the individual units may not hold good for the economy 
as a whole. For example, suppose a firm employs labour for production of output 
(say, cement). It can hire as many workers it requires at the ongoing wage rate. 
Thus, increase in demand for labour by a single firm does not have any impact on 
the wage rate. However, if all the firms in a country increase their demand for 
labour (say due to economic boom and optimism in the country), there will be 
shortage of labour and increase in wage rate. Further, the number of workers 
available for work in the country is limited; thus demand for labour beyond this 
limit will increase wage rate only, not the supply of labour.  
Let us look into the global energy crisis of 2022. This took the form of global 
shortages and increased the prices of oil, gas and electricity throughout the world. 
The crisis was caused by a variety of social and economic factors: labour 
shortages, political disputes, climate concerns, and the war between Russia and 
Ukraine. The world economy responds to such crises in certain ways. During the 
global energy crisis of 2022, for example, the oil-exporting countries witnessed 
an increased inflow of income while petroleum-importing countries experienced 
a rise in the cost of production. There was severe inflation in most countries. In 
order to control inflation, policy makers resorted to increase in interest rates and 
reduction in money supply.  
Countries design their monetary and fiscal policies for the welfare of people by 
controlling inflation and boosting economic growth. Macroeconomic theory 
guides economists and policymakers to explain the situation and design 
appropriate policy measures. Among economists, however, there is no agreement 
on how equilibrium levels of output, prices and employment are determined. 
Historically economic data are the same, but economists differ on the reasons and 
solution for economic problems. In microeconomics there is more or less some 
consensus. In macroeconomics, as you will see, there are sharp and often 
altogether different explanations and policy recommendations for the same 
phenomenon.  
Macroeconomics has been subjected to debates, particularly since the 1930s. The 
reasons behind such differences among economists are the basic assumptions and 
the models they take. Two major schools of thought – Classical and Keynesian – 
have interpreted economic events differently. Accordingly, they have accorded 


--- Page 9 ---
 
9 
 
The Classical    
Approach 
different explanations for the same economic issue. In this unit, we focus on the 
classical theories while Keynesian theories will be discussed in Unit 2. 
1.2 VARIOUS SCHOOLS OF MACROECONOMIC 
 THOUGHT 
A school of macroeconomic thought refers to a group of macroeconomic thinkers 
who share similar views on the behaviour of macroeconomic variables in an 
economy. As pointed out above, economists do not always share a similar 
approach in dealing with macroeconomic problems. For example, Keynesian 
theory came into existence as a response to the Great Depression. Further 
economic events during the 1970s led to the revival of the classical views in the 
form the New Classical Economics. As a response to New Classical economics, a 
new school of thought – New Keynesian Economics – was born by introducing 
micro-foundations and rational expectations in Keynesian economics. In later 
Units of this we will discuss about both these schools of thought. 
Classical economics refers to a school of thought prevalent during the eighteenth 
and early nineteenth century. They believed that the levels of economic variables 
in an economy were determined through market forces. It implies that wages, 
prices and interest rates are flexible in an economy. However, the occurrence of 
the Great Depression (1929-1933), which witnessed massive decline in income, 
output, employment and price level, a stock market crash, and banking panic 
falsified such assumptions. This led to the search for new explanations periodic 
fluctuations in output and employment in an economy. John Maynard Keynes, a 
British economist, opposed the classical ideas and advocated that prices and 
wages are not flexible; rather they are sticky. He coined the term “classical” to 
reflect the ideas presented by economists prior to him. Prominent among classical 
economists are Adam Smith, David Ricardo, Thomas Malthus, Anne Robert 
Jacques Turgot, John Stuart Mill, Jean-Baptiste Say, and Eugen Böhm von 
Bawerk.  
As opposed to the classical economists, Keynes advocated that the government 
should actively intervene in the market to counter recessionary conditions. From 
Keynes’s beliefs evolved a new school of macroeconomic thought that is called 
the Keynesian school. According to Keynesian economists, actual output could 
be lower than potential output of an economy and the gap can be closed through 
fiscal and monetary policy interventions. 
There are two major schools of thought: classical and Keynesian. Classical 
theory emerged in the 18 th and 19th centuries. It attempted to explain and analyse 
the remarkable increase in wealth. Classical theory relies on the assumption of 
fully flexible prices and wages, which results in an automatic adjustment in the 
market, ensuring no deficiency of aggregate demand. The economy operates at its 
full capacity or full employment level. These classical ideas failed to explain and 
understand the great depression of the 1930s. The depression had affected all the 
major advanced countries, wherein about one fourth of the labour force had 
become unemployed. Against this backdrop, John Maynard Keynes came up with 
his ideas, called Keynesian theory. He attempted to explain the event and 
advocated that such huge unemployment was because of inadequate aggregate 
