--- Page 28 ---
 
28 
 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics 2.1  INTRODUCTION 
In this Unit we will learn about the Keynesian model that was first developed by 
the British economist John Maynard Keynes in his famous book ‘The General 
Theory of Employment, Interest and Money’, published in 1936. This model 
differs in several respects from the classical approach to macroeconomics that 
you studied in the previous Unit. The Keynesian model allows for the existence 
of unemployment as well as rigidity in wages and prices. It recognizes that lack 
of effective demand may prevent the attainment of full employment of resources. 
Also, it emphasizes the need for government intervention – as the market 
mechanism would not be able to restore full employment equilibrium due to 
rigidities in wage rate and prices. 
2.2  COMPONENTS OF AGGREGATE DEMAND 
We observe that Keynesian economics gained importance against the backdrop 
of the Great Depression of the 1930s, when developed economies like the USA 
and Great Britain faced a deep and prolonged recession, with rising 
unemployment, falling revenues and profits of firms and rise in unutilized 
capacity. In this situation the market mechanism failed to restore equilibrium and 
the Keynesian policy of raising aggregate demand via increase in public 
expenditure played a crucial role in addressing the problem.  
Aggregate demand is the planned expenditure on goods and services by all the 
economic agents, such as households, firms and government. There are three 
main components of aggregate demand in a closed economy: (i) planned 
consumption expenditure (C) of households, (ii) planned investment expenditure 
(I) of firms, and (iii) expenditure incurred by the government on goods and 
services (G). Throughout our discussion in this Unit, each of C, I and G are 
assumed to be in real terms (i.e., no change in prices).  
2.2.1 Consumption Function 
Keynes proposed the idea of a Consumption function which gives the relation 
between planned consumption expenditure of households (C) and aggregate 
income (Y). It can be represented by the following linear equation:  
𝐶 = 𝑎 + 𝑏𝑌        … (2.1a) 
In the presence of the government, a part of income would be paid in taxes (T). 
In that case the consumption function would be represented as a function of 
disposable incomes (𝑌ௗ = 𝑌 − 𝑇), that is,  
𝐶 = 𝑎 + 𝑏(𝑌 − 𝑇) = 𝑎 + 𝑏𝑌ௗ       … (2.1b)   
For the discussion below, for simplicity, we assume that there is no government, 
so that T = 0 and Y = 𝑌ௗ .  
The slope of the consumption function ‘ 𝑏’ is assumed to be a positive fraction 
(i.e., 0 < 𝑏 < 1). It means that the consumption function can be represented as an 


--- Page 29 ---
 
29 
 
The Keynesian Model upward sloping straight line as in Fig. 2.1. It indicates that planned consumption 
expenditure increases with an increase in the level of aggregate income.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2.1: Consumption Function 
Note that ‘ b’ is defined as the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) and it 
represents the change in consumption induced by a unit change in income. The 
MPC is assumed to be less than one. If there is an increment in income by Y, the 
induced increase in consumption C is a fraction of Y (i.e., C =b Y and 
C/Y = b < 1 ). It means that the entire increment in income is not spent on 
consumption, a fraction ( 1 − 𝑏) is saved. It means total saving out of the 
incremental income is (1 − 𝑏)Y. 
Let us consider the case where the consumption function is given by C = 20 + 
0.25Y. If aggregate income increases by Rs.100 (i.e.,  
Y=100), then Rs. 25 ( C 
= 0.25 ×100) is the additional consumption and Rs.75 [(1 – 0.25)  ×100] is 
additional saving of households out of the incremental income. Similarly, if 
income declines by Rs.100, then consumption would decline by Rs. 25 only, 
while saving would decline by Rs. 75.  
The intercept of the consumption function ‘ a’ represents autonomous 
consumption, with 𝑎 > 0. From equation (2.1a), you can see that when  𝑌 = 0, 
we have  𝐶 = 𝑎. It implies that consumption occurs even when income is zero. 
This consumption is financed by drawing down past saving or by ‘dis-saving’. 
An increase in ‘ a’ represents increase in planned consumption of households at 
each level of income; this can happen, for instance, when consumer confidence 
increases (i.e., households’ expectations about the future turn buoyant). You can 
see in Fig. 2.1 that an increase in the intercept (from a0 to a1) results in a parallel, 
upward shift of the consumption function, from C0 to C1. 
Aggregate consumption has two components: (i) an autonomous component ‘ a’ 
that does not depend on income, and (ii) an ‘induced’ component ‘ bY’ that 
depends on aggregate income levels. An increase (decrease) in Y induces an 
increase (decrease) in planned consumption expenditure by households.  
The ratio of aggregate consumption expenditure to aggregate income ቀ
஼
௒
ቁ is 
defined as the average propensity to consume  (APC). From equation (2.1a) you 
C 
 a1 
 a0 
0 
𝑏 
Y 
𝐶ଵ = 𝑎ଵ + 𝑏𝑌 
𝐶଴ = 𝑎଴ + 𝑏𝑌 


--- Page 30 ---
 
30 
 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics 
can see that APC = 𝐶 𝑌⁄  = 𝑎 𝑌⁄ + 𝑏. Note that APC will decline as Y increases, 
while MPC remains constant.  
2.2.2 Investment Function 
The investment function (I) represents planned investment expenditure 
undertaken by firms on machinery, factories and other such items that add to 
productive capacity of the economy. In the simplest version of the Keynesian 
model investment is assumed to be ‘autonomous’, i.e., independent of the level of 
aggregate income (Y). In this case the investment function is represented by the 
equation as below. 
𝐼 = 𝐼̅         … (2.2a)   
In equation (2.2a) a ‘bar’ over the variable investment ( 𝐼̅) variable indicates a 
fixed amount. However, we can easily relax this assumption and allow 
investment to be a function of aggregate output. In this case the investment 
function is: 
 I = c + d Y        … (2.2b)  
where c > 0 and d > 0; ‘c’ is the autonomous part of investment, d is the marginal 
propensity to invest  (MPI) and ‘ d Y’ represents investment that is induced by 
aggregate income.  
Fig. 2a below depicts an autonomous investment function, while Fig. 2.2b depicts 
an induced investment function which has a component that is induced by 
income.  
 
 
 
 
       
         
 
Fig. 2.2a: Autonomous Investment    Fig. 2.2b: Induced Investment 
Note that the term investment refers to planned expenditure by firms on new 
production equipment (e.g., machinery, building, etc.) that add to productive 
capacity. It does not refer to buying of corporate bonds or shares in a company or 
opening a fixed deposit account in a bank.  
An important variable that affects firms’ decision to invest is the rate of interest. 
As the rate of interest increases, the cost of borrowing goes up, resulting in a 
reduction in the firms’ planned investment expenditure. The inverse relation 
between investment and interest rate can be further explained as follows:  
Y 
I = c + dY I 
c 
I 
I̅ 
Y
