--- Page 58 ---
 
 
 
58 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics 
A change in the value of a parameter leads to a shift in the IS curve. An increase 
in autonomous consumption (the coefficient ‘a’ in equation (3.4)) or autonomous 
investment (the coefficient ‘c’ in equation (3.4)) will lead to a parallel shift of the 
IS curve upward to the right. A change in the marginal propensity to consume, 
however, will affect the slope of the IS curve.  
Check Your Progress 1 
1)  What will be the nature of change in the IS curve if there is a decrease in the 
propensity to consume? 
 ………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………… 
2)  What is the implication of the following on the position of the IS curve? 
(i) Decrease in autonomous government expenditure 
(ii) Decrease in tax rate 
 ………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………… 
3.3 EQUILIBRIUM IN THE MONETARY SECTOR  
The derivation of LM curve utilises the Keynesian view that speculative demand 
and transaction demand for money are separate. The speculative demand for 
money depends on the rate of interest while the transaction demand and the 
precautionary demand for money depend on the level of income. Thus, total 
demand for money (M) depends on both income (Y) and rate of interest (i). The 
demand for money in real terms (
ெ ೏
௉
) is given by 
𝐿 = 𝑘𝑌 − ℎ𝑖          … (3.5) 
where k > 0, h > 0; L is the demand for real balances (liquidity), Y is aggregate 
income and 𝑖 is the rate of interest. You should remember three issues about the 
monetary sector: (i) A person would like to deposit his money in bank and earn 
interest on it. The alternative is to hold on to the cash, where no interest income is 
earned. Thus, the opportunity cost of holding money is the interest foregone. If 
there is an increase in the rate of interest, the interest foregone increases. 
Conversely, if the rate of interest decreases, the interest income foregone 
decreases. Therefore, the demand for money is a downward-sloping curve, if we 
measure rate of interest on the y-axis and quantity of money on the x-axis. You 
may be familiar with the concept of liquidity trap; a situation where the rate of 
interest is very low, and people prefer to keep all their money in the form of liquid 
cash as the interest income foregone is negligible. (ii) The demand for real balances 
is described for a given level of income. We consider the money demand function 


--- Page 59 ---
 
 
 
59 
The Neoclassical 
Synthesis 
while keeping the level of income fixed (say, 𝐿(𝑌଴ )). If there is an increase in the 
level of income, there is an increase in the level of transactions and wealth in the 
economy, which in turn increases the demand for money. Thus, there will be a 
parallel shift in the money demand function. (iii) The supply of money is 
determined by the central bank and it is constant. Thus, the supply of money is a 
vertical straight line. If the supply of money is increased by the central bank, the 
vertical straight line will shift to the right. When we deal with the short-run, we 
assume that money supply does not change.  
3.3.1 Derivation of the LM Curve  
The supply of money in real terms is given by 
ெ ೞ
௉
. Equilibrium in the money market 
is achieved when 𝐿 = 𝑀 = 𝑀ഥ . Thus, equilibrium in the money market is given by 
ெഥ
௉ത = 𝑘𝑌 − ℎ𝑖          … (3.6) 
We can re-arrange terms in the above equation and obtain 
𝑌 = −
ଵ
௛
ெഥ
௉ത +
௛
௞ 𝑖        … (3.6a) 
There is a positive relationship between 𝑌  and 𝑖 in the LM curve. In order to find 
out the slope of equation (3.6) you have to express the equation in terms 𝑖 and find 
out the slope 
ௗ௜
ௗ௒ . You can find out the slope of the LM curve as 
௞
௛ . Depending upon 
the value of the parameters, the LM curve would be flatter or steeper. 
  
         Fig. 3.3: Derivation of the LM Curve 
In Fig. 3.3, Panel (a) we depict the equilibrium in the money market (or, in the 
monetary sector). We take demand for real balances (
ெ
௉ ) on the x-axis and the rate 
of interest on the y-axis. Let the money demand in the economy be given as 
ெ ೏
௉ (𝑌଴ )  
when the aggregate income is 𝑌଴ . In panel (a) of Fig. 3.3, this equilibrium is 
represented by point ‘a’. The equilibrium rate of interest and income are 𝑖଴  and 𝑌଴  
w respectively.  
Let there be an increase in the level of income from 𝑌଴  to 𝑌ଵ . Such an increase in 
income will lead to a parallel upward shift in the money demand function. We 


--- Page 60 ---
 
 
 
60 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics depict this money demand function as a dotted line 
ெ ೏
௉ (𝑌ଵ ) in Panel (a) of Fig. 3.3. 
With money supply remaining constant, an increase in aggregate demand will lead 
to a rise in the interest rate. The economy is now at equilibrium with output level 
𝑌ଵ and interest rate 𝑖ଵ . The intersection between the money supply function and the 
money demand function is denoted by point ‘b’ in Fig. 3.3, panel (a).   
In panel (b) of Fig. 3.3 we plot the LM curve by taking combinations of interest 
rate and aggregate income where the money market is in equilibrium. We have two 
such points, ‘a’ and ‘b’ in panel (a) of Fig. 3.3. You should note that the LM curve 
is the combination of all the points where the money market is in equilibrium. The 
LM curve is upward-sloping as you can see from the figure. An implication of the 
LM curve is that as income increases people want to hold more money, thus driving 
up the interest rate. If the speculative demand for money is perfectly elastic to 
interest rate (liquidity trap situation) the LM curve will be horizontal. On the other 
hand, if speculative demand is perfectly inelastic to interest rate, the LM curve will 
be vertical.  
To the left side of the LM curve there is excess supply of money (for example, 
point ‘c’ in Fig. 3.3 panel (b)). Excess supply in the money market implies that the 
demand for money is less than its supply. It means that people want to reduce the 
amount of liquid cash they possess. This induces people to buy bonds so that bond 
prices rise and rate of interest declines. A decline in the rate of interest restores 
equilibrium in the economy. To the right side of the LM curve, there is excess 
demand for money (for example, point ‘d’ in Fig. 3.3 panel (b)). Excess demand 
for money causes people to sell bonds (so that they can keep higher amount of 
liquid cash). This leads to a fall in bond prices and rise in the rate of interest. This 
way equilibrium in the monetary sector is restored.     
3.3.2 Shift in the LM Curve 
The position and the slope of the LM curve depend upon certain factors, including 
money supply. An increase in money supply shifts the LM curve to the right. As a 
result, at every level of output, the equilibrium rate of interest is lower than before. 
Thus, increase in money supply shifts the LM curve to the right. Conversely, a 
decrease in money supply will shift the LM curve to the left so that equilibrium 
rate of interest is higher at every level of output.  
3.4 SIMULTANEOUS EQUILIBRIUM OF REAL 
AND MONETARY SECTORS 
Now let us combine IS and LM curves as shown in Fig. 3.4. Such integration of 
IS-LM gives a unique combination of 𝑖 and 𝑌, which represents equilibrium in 
both real market and money market. In Fig. 3.4 we superimpose 𝐼𝑆଴  and 𝐿𝑀଴  in 
the same diagram. We measure income (Y) on the x-axis income (Y) and rate of 
interest on the y-axis. The equilibrium rate of interest and the equilibrium output 
level are given by 𝑖଴  and 𝑌଴  respectively.  
