--- Page 34 ---
 
34 
 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics 
𝑌௘  = ( 𝑎 + 𝐼̅)/(1 − 𝑏)      … (2.5) 
We depict equilibrium level of output in Fig. 2.3. Along the horizontal axis we 
measure output or income (recall that income is generated in the process of 
production of output, so we use the terms income and output interchangeably). 
Along the vertical axis we measure aggregate demand and its components ( C and 
I).  
Note that OL is a line which makes an angle of 45 0 with the horizontal axis, so 
that a perpendicular from this line such as AY 1, forms an isosceles triangle 
AOY1, with OAY1 = AOY1 = 45 0, and as per the property of isosceles 
triangles, the two sides O Y1 and A Y1 are equal. Using this construct we are able 
to compare vertical distances (demand) with the horizontal distances (output or 
income). Note that at A, where the consumption function cuts OL, consumption 
expenditure AY1 is exactly equal to income OY1, so that saving is zero.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   Fig. 2.3: Equilibrium Output in a Two-Sector Economy 
In Fig. 2.3 we derive the aggregate demand curve (AD) by adding the investment 
(𝐼̅) and consumption (C) functions. Since investment is autonomous the line AD 
is parallel to the consumption function, i.e., slope of AD is the same as the slope 
of the consumption function. Equilibrium output is attained at E, at the 
intersection of AD with OL where aggregate demand EY e is equal to aggregate 
output OY e. Note that the equilibrium is unique, as there is only one level of 
income OYe at which aggregate demand is equal to aggregate supply. In this case 
firms will be able to sell exactly as much as they had planned and hence there 
will be no unplanned changes in their stock of inventories. 
For all income levels less than OY e, i.e., to the left of E, there is excess demand 
for output. For example, when aggregate income is OY 1 (=AY 1), the 
corresponding level of aggregate demand GY 1 is greater than the supply of 
output AY1 (=OY1). In this case since demand is more than the output produced 
by firms, they will have to run down their stock of inventories. So in the next 
Ye 
AD, C 
and I 
I̅ 
o 
G 
E 
H L 
J 
Y1 Y2 
450 
Y 
A 
AD = C + I̅ 
 
C = a + b Y 
 


--- Page 35 ---
 
35 
 
The Keynesian Model period, firms will increase production and output would move toward OY e. This 
process of increase in output (and hence income) will continue till OY e is 
reached, where the amount produced (OY e) being exactly equal to the amount 
demanded (EY e), there is no unplanned changes in the stock of inventories and 
hence no further change in production levels.  
Similarly, to the right of E (i.e., at all income levels greater than OY e), there will 
be excess supply of output. When income is OY 2, the corresponding level of 
aggregate demand JY 2 is less than the supply HY 2 (= OY 2). In this case, firms 
will be unable to sell the entire amount produced (HY 2 > JY 2) and hence their 
stock of inventories will increase (i.e., there will be unplanned inventory 
accumulation by firms). This would induce firms to reduce production in the next 
period. This process will continue till the equilibrium output EY e (=OY e) is 
reached, where demand and supply are equal and there are no more unanticipated 
changes in firms’ stock of inventories.  
From this discussion we see that output market equilibrium in the Keynesian 
model is stable. Any situation of disequilibrium tends to be self-correcting, 
inducing a movement back towards the equilibrium level of output.  
Three-Sector Economy with Government 
In equation (2.4) we derived equilibrium output in a three sector model, with 
households, firms and a government sector. Diagrammatically this can be shown 
in Fig. 2.4. As earlier, the OL line makes an angle of 45 0 with the horizontal axis 
along which we measure income (or output). Aggregate demand is measured 
along the vertical axis. Now, this has three components, C, I and G, where 
investment and government expenditure are autonomous.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2.4: Equilibrium Output in a Three-sector Economy  
Equilibrium in the three-sector model occurs at the intersection of the AD curve 
and the OL line, where demand AY e is equal to aggregate supply OY e. You 
should see that equilibrium income level OY e is unique and that this equilibrium 
is stable. At all income levels higher than OY e there is excess supply, so that 
firms decrease production, inducing a change in output towards OY e. On the 
other hand, at all income levels lower than OY e, there is excess demand, inducing 
firms to increase production. 
AD,C, I, G 
Ye 
450 
A 
o 
L 
Y 
AD = C + I̅ + G 


--- Page 36 ---
 
36 
 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics 
Note that the position of the AD curve is determined by the size of the 
autonomous components of aggregate demand (viz., I, G and autonomous 
consumption a). The higher the levels of these components, the higher would be 
the AD line and the higher would be the equilibrium output level (Y e), implying 
that output is demand-determined in the Keynesian model.  
2.3.2 Investment Multiplier 
We will now examine the comparative static properties of the Keynesian model 
and explain the concept of the multiplier.  
Autonomous Investment 
Consider once again the two-sector model with only firms and households, such 
that equilibrium income is 𝑌௘  = ( 𝑎 + 𝐼̅)/(1 − 𝑏). If, ceteris paribus,  there is a 
change in the level of autonomous investment ( I), the associated change in 
income would be given by ∆𝑌 = (1/(1 − 𝑏) × ∆𝐼. Thus, 
∆௒
∆ூ = (1/(1 − 𝑏). Here, 
we consider change in one component of autonomous demand at a time. This 
means when I > 0, we shall assume that a = 0 and so on. The term (
ଵ
ଵି௕ ) is 
greater than one, since our assumption is that (0 < b <1). An implication of the 
above is that when investment increases by I, the associated increase in income 
is greater than I, as it is a multiple of I. How is this possible? To see this, 
consider the several rounds of increments in expenditure that are triggered by a 
onetime increase in autonomous expenditure. 
If we increase  I by I, income will increase by I in the first round, which will 
induce a second round increase in consumption by bI (since consumption is a 
function of income). Since output is demand-determined, this increase in 
consumption demand raises output and hence income increases further by bI. 
This induces a third round increase in consumption by [ b(bI) = b 2I] which 
triggers further increases in income ( b2I). In the fourth round, consumption 
demand increases by [ b(b2I) = b 3I]. The process continues with increase in 
consumption raising output, income and yet another round of consumption. Note 
that since MPC < 1 (i.e., b < 1), each subsequent round of increase in 
consumption is weaker than the previous one, so that the entire process dies 
down gradually.  
Therefore, the total increase in income due to a onetime increase in autonomous 
investment is:  
 Y = (I + bI + b2I + b3I + …..) = I ( 1 + b2 + b3 + b4 + …..)  
 …(2.6) Since 0 < b < 1, the expression in parentheses on the right hand 
side of (2.6) can be expressed as the sum of a convergent infinite geometric 
progression series, i.e., 1 + b2 + b3 + b4 + ….. = 1/(1 − 𝑏). Therefore, Y = [1 / 
(1 – b)] I, which shows that income increases by a multiple of the initial 
increase in autonomous investment and the multiplier is (
ଵ
ଵି௕ ). This is shown 
diagrammatically in Fig. 2.5.  
 
