--- Page 64 ---
 
 
 
64 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics 
The full employment output is given by the production capacity of the economy. 
It is derived from the production function (see Unit 1). Suppose the full 
employment output (potential output) of the economy is given by 𝑌∗. We depict it 
by a vertical straight line in Fig. 3.7. The IS 0 curve and LM 0 curve intersect at E 
which corresponds to the full employment output.  
 
Fig. 3.7: Adjustment to Adverse Supply Shocks 
Suppose the economy gets an adverse supply shock (for example, decline in 
agricultural productivity due to drought), as a result of which there is a decrease in 
the potential output of the economy from 𝑌∗ to 𝑌∗∗. As pointed out above, the IS 
curve is relatively stable in such situations and the economy adjusts through a shift 
in the LM curve. Due to the adverse supply shock, there is a rise in prices and 
consequent leftward shift in the LM curve. Thus, there is a rise in the rate of interest 
and the new equilibrium is at F.  
Check Your Progress 2 
1)  Explain how the LM curve is derived.  
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………… 
2)  Suppose the LM curve is vertical. What are its implications? 
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………… 
3)   In the IS-LM model, explain how adjustment to supply shocks takes place. 
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………… 


--- Page 65 ---
 
 
 
65 
The Neoclassical 
Synthesis 3.5 AD-AS MODEL  
In the IS-LM model we assumed that price level is constant. Let us relax that 
assumption and look into the impact of prices on equilibrium output in the 
economy. First, we derive the aggregate demand (AD) curve. Subsequently, we 
juxtapose the AD curve with the aggregate supply (AS) curve and find out the 
equilibrium level of output.  
3.5.1 Derivation of the AD Curve 
A change in the price level changes the real money supply (
ெ ೞ
௉ ) in the economy. 
This will result in a shift in the LM curve if money supply (M) is assumed to be 
constant. Thus, there will be a change in the equilibrium rate of interest and output. 
If we assume that the price level keeps changing over time, we will obtain a series 
of equilibrium levels of output corresponding to different price levels. If we plot 
such combinations of prices and output, we obtain the aggregate demand (AD) 
curve. 
The derivation of the AD curve from IS-LM curves is shown in Fig. 3.8. In panel 
(a) of Fig. 3.8 we juxtapose 𝐼𝑆଴  and 𝐿𝑀଴  curves intersecting at point E with an 
equilibrium income level of 𝑌଴  and interest rate 𝑖଴ . The 𝐿𝑀଴   curve is based on real 
money stock of 𝑀଴ /𝑃଴ . Thus, we describe the combination 𝑃଴  and 𝑌଴  as point ‘a’ 
on the AD curve in panel (b) of Fig.3.8.  
 
Fig. 3.8: Derivation of AD Curve 
Now, let us assume that price level declines to 𝑃ଵ  . If there is no change in money 
stock, supply of real balances increases to  𝑀଴ /𝑃ଵ . Note that the increase in real 
balances is due to decrease in prices, not due to an increase nominal money stock. 
The LM curve shifts to the right. In panel (a) of Fig. 3.8 we depict the new LM 
curve as 𝐿𝑀ଵ .  With 𝐼𝑆଴  and 𝐿𝑀ଵ , the new equilibrium point is ‘b’; the rate of 
interest falls to 𝑖ଵ  and income rises to 𝑌ଵ . The combination of 𝑃ଵ   and 𝑌ଵ  becomes 
point ‘b’ in Panel (b) of Fig. 3.7. By joining all such points as ‘a’ and ‘b’, we obtain 
the AD curve. 


--- Page 66 ---
 
 
 
66 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics 
The AD curve is downward-sloping, which indicates an inverse relationship 
between prices and output. A decline in price level increases the real money 
supply, which creates disequilibrium in the money market. Increase in the supply 
of real balances lead to a decrease in interest rate. A decrease in the rate of interest 
restores equilibrium in the money market. A decrease in the rate of interest leads 
to an increase in the level of investment. An increase in the level of investment 
leads to an increase in aggregate expenditure, thereby increasing the level of 
output.  
The AD curve is flatter, if a given change in price leads to a larger change in output. 
On the other hand, the AD curve is steeper if a given change in price leads to a 
smaller increase in output. The AD curve shifts upward to the right as a result of 
expansionary fiscal policy (e.g., increase in government expenditure, reduction in 
tax rate). A contractionary fiscal policy, on the other hand, shifts the AD curve 
downward to the left. Similarly, an expansionary monetary policy (e.g., reduction 
in interest rate, increase in money supply through open market operations, reserve 
requirements, etc.) will shift the AD curve to the right while a contractionary 
monetary policy will shift the AD curve to the left.  
You should note that any factor that leads to a shift in the IS curve or the LM curve 
to the right will shift the AD curve to the right side. Similarly, any factor that shifts 
the IS curve or LM curve to the left will shift the AD curve to the left. Thus, an 
increase in any component of autonomous spending such as an increase in 
government spending leads to a rightward shift of the AD curve. Also, an increase 
in the nominal money supply will shift the AD curve upwards.  
3.5.2 Aggregate Supply (AS) Curve 
From microeconomics we know that the AS curve is upward-sloping – when price 
of a product increases, firms produce more of the product. In the case of the whole 
economy, production capacity is limited. Resources available to the economy are 
not unlimited. The behaviour of the AS curve is different in the long run compared 
to the short run. Short run, as you know, is a time period in which wages and certain 
other economic variables do not respond to changes in economic environment. In 
the long run is a time period in which wages and prices are flexible.  
Classical theory discussed in Unit 1 assumed that the AS curve is vertical at the 
full employment level. Thus, output is perfectly inelastic to changes in prices. 
Keynes went to the other extreme and assumed that the AS curve is horizontal. An 
implication of the horizontal AS curve is that firms can increase production to any 
level without affecting prices. Both the versions (vertical and horizontal) of the AS 
curve seems unrealistic. As you will learn in later units, the new-classical 
economists suggest that the AS curve is upward-sloping in the short run. Lucas’ in 
his ‘aggregate supply hypothesis’ advocate that economic agents respond to price 
and wage incentives, which influences their trade-off between leisure and work. 
As a result, when actual wage is higher than equilibrium wage rate, households 
supply more labour. Conversely, when actual wage rate is lower than equilibrium 
wage rate, household will decrease their supply of labour. As a result of this, the 
