--- Page 16 ---
 
16 
 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics 
Since there is full employment in the economy all the time, with a given 
production function and capital, the Aggregate Supply (AS) is inelastic at full 
employment level of output. In Fig 1.3 we have shown the AS curve as a vertical 
straight line. Note that the AS curve will shift if there is a change in the level of 
technology (production function) or the level of capital.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         Fig. 1.3: Aggregate Supply Curve 
1.5  QUANTITY THEORY OF MONEY  
To understand the effects of changes in the stock of money, we need to study the 
money market equilibrium. Money is a stock variable. Its stock means its 
quantity at a point of time. Money is an asset demanded by the public for its 
holding. Money is supplied by the government and the banking system. The 
interaction of the demand for money and the supply of money create a money 
market. In this unit, we assume that the monetary authority autonomously 
determines the supply of money in an economy. Hence, the aggregate demand for 
money refers to the demand for money by the public. Thus, demand for money 
means the sum of all the money demanded by individual members of the public, 
whether households or firms.  
There are various theories of demand for money, such as (i) the classical theory 
of demand for money, or the Quantity Theory of Money (QTM); (ii) the 
Keynesian theory of demand for money; and (iii) Friedman’s restatement of 
Classical QTM. In this Unit, we will discuss the classical theory of demand for 
money. It is popularly known as the QTM, which is basically a theory of the 
price level. Recall that money has four functions; (i) a medium of exchange, (ii) a 
standard of deferred payment, (iii) a store of value, and (iv) a unit of account. 
According to classical economists, money is demanded for its function as a 
medium of exchange. There are several versions of the popular classical QTM. 
Below we present the transaction version, which is known as the Fisher’s 
equation of exchange: 
Y1
AS 
Y
3P1
2P1
P
Output 
Aggregate Price Level 


--- Page 17 ---
 
17 
 
The Classical    
Approach 
M.V = P.T         … (1.5) 
where, 
T is number of transactions of average size, and proxy for income level 
M is quantity o f  money supply, 
V  is velocity of circulation of money, and 
P  i s  the average price level. 
Classical economists rely heavily on the QTM to establish the theory of demand 
for money. The QTM says that there is a proportional relationship between the 
amount of money held by the public and the price level. As per the classical 
assumption of full employment, the output level is given. Hence, T in equation 
(1.5) is fixed as a proxy for national income. Further, V is defined as the number 
of times a rupee moves from one hand to another during a given period. This 
means that it relies on the public’s payment behaviour, which is constant in the 
long run. 
The right-hand side of equation (1.5), PT represents the total amount of money 
required to facilitate transactions, i.e., the purchase or sale of total output in the 
economy. The left-hand side of equation (1.5) In the same equation, the left-side 
term MV is the product of the number of rupees in circulation and the number of 
times each is used for public payments. Hence, MV represents the total amount 
of money available for transactions during the given period. Equilibrium is 
achieved in the system at the point where money demanded (PT) equals money 
supply (MV). 
The equation (1.5) can be rewritten as below,  
𝑃 =
௏
்
𝑀        … (1.6)   
As mentioned earlier, the terms V and T are constants in equation (1.6). Thus, the 
equation indicates that money supply directly affects price level. For instance, if 
M is increased by four times, price level P will rise by four times. Therefore, 
classical QTM is known as a theory of price level. 
The other approach of classical QTM describes the relationship between the 
demand for money and ‘nominal output’ by taking directly real output instead of 
number of transactions. In equation form, it can be expressed as 
MV = PY         … (1.7)  
where,  
M  is the money supply 
V  is the velocity of money that is the number of times the money changes 
hand. 
P  is the output price, and  
Y  is the real output level. 


--- Page 18 ---
 
18 
 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics 
The total stock of money in the economy, measured by money supply times the 
velocity of circulation (MV), equals the nominal value of transactions or the 
nominal value of income or output in the economy (PY). The identity given at 
(1.7) is converted into the QTM under the assumption that Y and V are stable or 
constant in the short run. With Y and V being constant, the assumption that price 
level is passive means that P depends on changes in M rather than M depends on 
changes in P. These assumptions indicate that any short-run decrease (or 
increase) in M must lead to a proportional decrease (or increase) in P. Relaxation 
or invalidity of any one of these assumptions would not hold the proportionality 
relationship of P with M.  
According to classical theory, under perfect competition with full employment in 
the economy, the output level is fixed ( 𝑌ሬ⃑). The velocity of circulation is 
predetermined (𝑉ሬ⃑) and money supply is exogenously given. From equation (1.6), 
Price level (P) is proportional to the money supply (M). 
𝑃 = (𝑉ሬሬ⃑ 𝑌ሬሬ⃑⁄ ) × 𝑀 … (1.8) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.4: Equilibrium Output and Prices 
Thus, the labour market and production function determine the output level while 
money supply determines the price level in the classical scheme. The quantity 
theory of the money also gives the aggregate demand curve (see Fig. 1.4). 
Although the classical theory is accepted by most economists, Keynesian 
economists and Monetarists have criticized it. They believe that the classical 
theory fails in the short run when the prices are sticky. Also, it has been 
established that the velocity of money does not remain constant over  
time. Nevertheless, the classical theory can be used to understand and control 
inflation in the economy. 
AD0
AS 
E 
P
Y 𝑌ത 
