--- Page 10 ---
 
10 
 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics 
demand, which in turn was the result of a deficiency in investment demand. He 
criticized the assumption of a laissez-faire economy in the classical theory and 
advocated policy intervention to increase demand and employment. 
Later, attempts were made to integrate ideas from both the schools, which led to 
the “neoclassical synthesis”. The IS-LM model that we discuss in Unit 3 is an 
outcome of the neoclassical synthesis. During the 1950s, economists such as 
Harrod, Domar and Kaldor extended the Keynesian ideas from short-run to long-
run. They argued that there would be an increase in production capacity in the 
long run because of large investments. This in turn would boost economic 
growth. The focus of these economists, called the Post-Keynesians, was to 
understand, explain and analyse economic growth. In order to overcome certain 
limitations of the post-Keynesian growth models, Robert M. Solow came up with 
the neoclassical growth model. You will go through these growth models in the 
course, ‘Economics of Growth and Development’.  
Keynesian school of thought dominated economic theory and policy after the 
World War II until the 1970s. During the 1970s most of the advanced economies 
witnessed stagnation and inflation, a situation called “stagflation”. Keynesian 
theories did not have appropriate policy response to stagflation, which led to the 
exploration of fresh explanations of economic behavior. Robert E. Lucas, an 
American economist, revived the classical ideas and countered the prevailing 
Keynesian thought. The ideas of classical and Keynesian schools differ from 
each other on various issues, including: i) the role played by demand and supply 
in determination of equilibrium output, employment and prices; ii) the 
assumption of flexibility of price level and wage rate in the economy; iii) the 
dichotomy of real and monetary sectors of the economy, and (iv) neutrality of 
money. 
After the 1970s, however, there was revival of classical economics in the form of 
new-classical theory. In response to that, new-Keynesian models came up. New 
Classical economics retained the basic characteristics of classical economics but 
introduced two new concepts: rational expectations and micro-foundations. We 
will cover these aspects in later units of this course.  
Along with these mainstream schools of thought, there is heterodox schools of 
thought or heterodox economics. It includes Marxist, Austrian, institutional, 
feminist and social economics among many others. In fact, there is a need for 
promoting pluralism in economics these days and researchers are venturing into 
many new areas. The mainstream or conventional economics, as mentioned, 
earlier have been Classical and Keynesian. The legacy of these two schools of 
thought have continued in different forms. Two prominent schools of thought in 
recent years have been New-Classical economics and New-Keynesian 
economics. There are certain common features of these two schools of thought: 
(i) general equilibrium models, (ii) micro-foundations in behaviour of economic 
agents, and (iii) rational expectations. Two major differences between both the 
schools of thought are: (i) the assumption regarding market structure – the new-
classical school assumes that there is perfect competition in the market while the 
new-Keynesian school assumes market imperfection. (ii) the assumption of 
flexibility in wages and prices – the new-classical school assumes flexibility in 


--- Page 11 ---
 
11 
 
The Classical    
Approach 
wages and prices while the new-Keynesin school assumes rigidities in wages and 
prices.  
1.3 BASIC FEATURES OF CLASSICAL THEORY 
Classical economics evolved against the perception of ‘mercantilism’. The 
mercantilists believed that the wealth of nations depended on the stock of bullion 
(or, gold and silver) and adopted policies that promoted exports and discouraged 
imports through subsidies and tariffs. Classical economists discarded such ideas 
and believed that ‘wealth of nations’ depended on real factors. For them, money 
is merely a medium of exchange. Important features of classical theory are as 
follows: 
(i) Microeconomic Issues: Classical economists dealt mostly with 
microeconomic issues pertaining to behavior of economic agents such as 
firms and households. In classical view, a firm maximizes its profits subject 
to a resource constraint. Similarly, households try to maximize their utilities 
or economic gains given their budget constraints. Classical economists 
believed in the optimising tendencies of the market mechanism. According 
to classical economists, variables such as price level, wage rate and output 
level should be determined by market forces (supply and demand).  
(ii) Laissez Faire: Classical economists believed in the philosophy of ‘laissez 
faire’, which is a French term meaning ‘leave alone’ or ‘let you do’. 
According to this view, there should be minimal intervention from the 
government in business affairs. In fact, Adam Smith suggested that 
government should confine itself to three main duties, viz., (i) national 
defense, (ii) administration of justice (law and order), and (iii) establishing 
and maintaining certain public works (infrastructure, education, etc.).  
(iii) Invisible Hand : Adam Smith introduced the concept of the ‘invisible 
hand’. According to him, the economy will function well if everyone 
pursues his/ her own interest. According to him, “It is not from the 
benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker that we expect our 
dinner, but from their regard to their own interest”. Individuals pursuing 
self-interest seem to be led by an ‘invisible hand’ to maximise the general 
welfare of everyone in the economy. It is not the generosity of a producer in 
selling a commodity; it is his/her self interest. Similarly, the consumers are 
not doing a favour to the producer; they are pursuing their own interest in 
buying the commodity. The philosophy of the invisible hand confined 
classical economists to the analysis of the behavior of economic agents; 
they failed to see any conflict between interest of economic agents and that 
of the economy as a whole.  
(iv) Continuous Market Clearing : Classical economists assumed that prices 
and wage rates are flexible. As you know from microeconomics, 
equilibrium price is determined at the level where supply and demand are 
equal. Given the supply and demand curves, if demand is more compared to 
supply, price will increase. Similarly, if supply is more compared to 
demand, price will decrease. This principle applies not only to 
commodities, but also to wage rate. If supply of labour is more than its 


--- Page 12 ---
 
12 
 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics 
demand, there will be a decline in wage rate till supply of labour equates its 
demand. An implication of the above is that there is no unemployment in 
the economy – wage rate will decline till all workers are employed. There is 
no disequilibrium in the market.  
(v) Perfect Competition : Classical economists assumed that there is perfect 
competition in the market so that markets function smoothly. As there is 
full employment (due to flexibility in wage rate), production is always at 
the full employment level. An implication of the above is that there is no 
scope for ups and downs in the level of output. Going by this logic, the 
classical economists ruled out the possibility of ‘business cycle’. 
(vi) Say’s Law of Market : Classical economists believed that production or 
supply is the key to economic prosperity. Thus, they emphasized more on 
the supply side of the economy. This approach is summarized very well in 
the Say’s law, named after the prominent classical economist J B Say. 
According to J B Say, ‘supply creates its own demand’. Whenever some 
production takes place, there is a stream of income in the hands of people, 
which generates demand.  
A person should have produced something to sell (say, for example, labour) 
and thereby earned certain income. Thus, in the classical viewpoint, there is 
no scope of deficiency of demand in the economy. Therefore, primary 
concern before an economy is production or supply, not demand.  
(vii) Neutrality of Money: According to classical economists, economic growth 
of an economy is due to increase in the factors of production and 
technological progress. Money is just a medium of exchange; and it 
facilitates transactions among economic agents. Thus, increase in money 
supply does not affect the level of output – it only leads to increase in prices 
(see quantity theory of money discussed below). They believed that there is 
dichotomy between monetary variables such as money supply and prices, 
and real variables such as output and employment. Thus, classical 
economists stressed the role of real factors in deciding the real variables 
such as output and employment. As mentioned earlier, classical economists 
believed in free market systems without government intervention. 
Determination of output, employment and interest rate in the classical 
system is given below.  
We discuss some of the major issues in the next section. 
Check Your Progress 1 
 1)  Write down the important features of classical theory. 
 .......................................................................................................................
 .......................................................................................................................
 .......................................................................................................................
 ....................................................................................................................... 
