--- Page 61 ---
 
 
 
61 
The Neoclassical 
Synthesis 
 
Fig. 3.4: Simultaneous Equilibrium 
3.4.1 Shocks in the IS-LM Model 
Previously we have discussed about the factors that lead to a shift in the IS curve 
and the LM curve. Often the economy experiences exogenous demand shocks and 
supply shocks. Let us analyse the impact of such shocks in terms of the IS-LM 
model. Suppose there is a boom in the stock market, which changes the wealth of 
households. Such a situation will increase the level of consumption in the 
economy. Consequently, there will be an increase in aggregate expenditure and the 
IS curve will shift to the right from 𝐼𝑆଴  to 𝐼𝑆ଵ  (see Fig. 3.4). As a result, there is an 
increase in output from 𝑌଴  to 𝑌ଵ . A negative shock such as a decrease in business 
confidence of firms will shift the IS curve to the left. Such a left-ward shift in the 
IS curve will decrease output as well as interest rate. 
Let us consider another example. Suppose there is a series of online financial fraud 
cases in the country. This will send a negative signal to people – this will 
discourage people to keep their income in the formal system; there will be a decline 
in online transactions and the demand for money will increase. As a result, the LM 
curve will shift to the right from 𝐿𝑀଴  to 𝐿𝑀ଵ (see Fig. 3.4).  Consequently, there 
will be an increase in output from 𝑌଴  to 𝑌ଶ , and decrease in interest rate from 𝑖଴  to 
𝑖ଶ .  
You should note that the nature and extent of change in output and interest rate 
will depend upon the slope of the IS and LM curves. If the LM curve is flatter, 
monetary policy is quite effective. A small decrease in interest rate by the central 
bank will increase output by a large amount. If the LM curve is steeper, monetary 
policy will not be effective. In order to increase output by a small amount we will 
need a large decrease in the interest rate.  
3.4.2 Adjustment Process in the Economy 
A question arises at this point: What happens to the economy if it is operating at a 
point which is not at the intersection of the IS and LM curves? Does it 
automatically converge to the equilibrium point? Let us try to answer this question. 


--- Page 62 ---
 
 
 
62 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics 
If the economy is not operating at the unique point where the IS and LM curves 
intersect, there is disequilibrium in the economy. In that case an adjustment process 
starts and the economy moves to an equilibrium point. The following two issues 
are important in this context: 
a) If there is an excess demand for money (to the right of the LM curve), the 
interest rate will increase. The interest rate will fall in case we observe 
excess supply in the money market. Fall in interest rate will lead to increase 
in investment. Increase in investment will affect the IS curve.  
b) Excess demand for goods (to the left of the IS curve) leads to an increase 
in output. Increase in output will lead to increased demand for money. 
Increase in demand for money will lead to rise in interest rate and outward 
shift in the LM curve.   
We observe from the above that both real sector and monetary sector are inter-
related. A real shock to the economy will have effects on the monetary sector and 
vice versa.  
 
 
Fig. 3.5: Convergence to Equilibrium Point 
In Fig. 3.5 we plot the IS and LM curves. The economy is in equilibrium at point 
E, with 𝑖଴  to 𝑌଴  as equilibrium interest rate and output respectively. Suppose, due 
to certain shock to the economy, the equilibrium is disturbed. We have indicated 
the points F, G, H and K where the economy is not in equilibrium.  
Let us consider point G. As mentioned earlier, at point G, there is excess demand 
for money and excess supply of goods. The arrows given at point G specify the 
direction in which adjustment takes place. Due to excess demand for money, there 
will be a rise in the rate of interest. This is because people will sell bonds so as to 
hold more of liquid cash, as a result of which the bond prices will decline and rate 
of interest will increase. Upward pointing arrow in Fig. 3.5 represents rising 
interest rate. At point G, there is excess supply of goods also. This will lead to 
involuntary accumulation of goods; inventories will increase. As a result, firms 
will cut down production and the level of output will decline. The leftward pointing 
arrow represents the declining output. Finally, the economy will move towards 
equilibrium point E. 


--- Page 63 ---
 
 
 
63 
The Neoclassical 
Synthesis 
Points F, H and K in Fig. 3.5 also are disequilibrium points. You can analyse the 
supply and demand conditions at these points and find out the directions in which 
adjustment will take place. For example, at point ‘H’ there is excess supply of 
money (since it is to the left of the LM curve) and excess demand for goods (since 
it is to the left of the IS curve). Excess supply of money will lead to a decrease in 
interest rate. Excess demand for goods will lead to an increase in output level. 
Consequently, the economy will move towards the equilibrium point E.  
Suppose the economy is at point F (see Fig. 3.5) – here the monetary sector is in 
equilibrium, but the real sector is in disequilibrium. There is an excess supply of 
goods in the economy. This will lead to an increase in inventory accumulation. As 
a result, firms will decrease their production levels. Decrease in output will lead to 
a decrease in the demand for money and consequent decrease in the rate of interest. 
Finally, the economy will reach the equilibrium point E where both the IS and LM 
curves intersect.  
 
Fig. 3.6: Adjustment Process in the Economy 
Note that when one of the two markets is observing disequilibrium, the economy 
reaches back to equilibrium after the adjustment process. In Fig. 3.6 we have 
indicated the direction of change by arrow marks.  
3.4.3 Impact of Supply Shocks 
In the IS-LM model it is not necessary that the equilibrium occurs at the level of 
potential output of the economy (or, full employment output). Equilibrium could 
be at any level of output in the economy. An objective of policy makers has always 
been that the economy should operate at potential output level with unemployment 
at its natural level. In the long run does the economy maintain equilibrium at the 
full employment output level?  
In the long run prices do not remain constant. If actual output is above the potential 
out, there will be price rise. The aggregate expenditure of the economy (such as 
consumption, investment and government expenditure) describes the demand for 
goods and services, which refer to physical quantities of goods and services. A 
change in the price level may not affect these quantities. Thus, the IS curve is 
relatively stable – it may not shift. The LM curve, on the other hand, is based on 
the supply of and demand for real balances. Thus, a change in price level will shift 
the LM curve.  
