--- Page 52 ---
 
52 
 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics 
money demand and the rate of interest could be explained by the Keynesian 
concept of speculative demand for money. We also learnt about the liquidity trap 
– at unusually low rate of interest the demand for money becomes infinitely 
elastic and traditional monetary policy became ineffective.  
2.8  ANSWERS/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS 
EXERCISES 
Check Your Progress 1 
1)  Consumption function is a linear function given by 𝐶 = 𝑎 + 𝑏𝑌. The APC 
declines with increase in Y while the MPC remains constant.  
2)  i) A decrease in autonomous consumption will lead to a parallel downward 
shift in the consumption function.  
(ii) An increase in MPC will increase the slope of the consumption function.  
3)  Autonomous investment remains constant irrespective of the level of income 
or interest. Induced invest depends on income or rate or interest or both. See 
Sub-Section 2.2.2 for details. 
4)  As interest rate decreases the cost of borrowing decreases. Thus, some of the 
projects which were unviable earlier become profitable. Therefore, more 
investment takes place with decrease in interest rate.  
Check Your Progress 2 
1)  Keynesian model is based on the assumption that resources are under-
utlised, prices and wage rate are rigid, and output is a homogenous 
commodity.  
2)  a) Aggregate demand function is: 𝑌 = 30 + 0.75𝑌. Equilibrium income is 
120. 
 b) Equilibrium output will increase to 140. 
 c) 4 
 d) In the case of lump sum tax, the multiplier will be the same as 
autonomous expenditure multiplier given in (b).  In the case of proportional 
tax at the rate of 0.1, the multiplier will be reduce to  
ଵ
ଵି଴ .଻ହ ×଴ .ଽ = 3.08 
 e) The open economy multiplier is given by 1 / (1 – b + m). Therefore, the 
multiplier will be 1.8. 
3) Go through Sub-Section 2.3.1 and answer.  
Check Your Progress 3 
1) (a) Go through Sub-Section 2.4.2; explain Fig. 2.7. 


--- Page 53 ---
 
53 
 
The Keynesian Model (b) Saving will be lower than investment, since (S + T) = (𝐼̅+G). 
2) Refer to Fig. 2.8 and Fig. 2.9 for the answer.  
3) (i)   𝑆 = −10 + 0.25𝑌; (ii) 120; (iii) 112 
Check Your Progress 4 
1) You should discuss about transaction demand, precautionary demand 
and speculative demand for money.  
2) Refer to Sub-Section 2.5.1 and answer.  
3) It refers to the insensitiveness of the demand for money to rate of 
interest, when the rate of interest is very low. Conventional instruments 
of monetary policy become ineffective in liquidity trap.  
4) Government should increase public expenditure so that there is no 
decrease in effective demand. 
5) High fiscal deficit increases government debt burden, increases interest 
rate amd may lead to crowding out of private expenditure.  


--- Page 54 ---
UNIT 3 THE NEOCLASSICAL SYNTHESIS 
Structure 
3.0 Objectives 
3.1 Introduction 
3.2 Equilibrium in the Real Sector  
3.2.1 Derivation of the IS Curve 
3.2.2 Shift in the IS Curve 
3.3 Equilibrium in the Monetary Sector  
3.3.1 Derivation of the LM Curve 
3.3.2 Shift in the LM Curve 
3.4 Simultaneous Equilibrium of Real and Monetary Sectors 
3.4.1 Shocks in the IS-LM Model 
3.4.2 Adjustment Process in the Economy 
3.4.3 Impact of Supply Shocks 
3.5 AD-AS Model 
3.5.1 Derivation of the AD Curve 
3.5.2 Aggregate Supply Curve 
3.6 Let Us Sum Up 
3.7 Answers/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
3.0 OBJECTIVES 
After going through this unit, you should be in a position to 
 explain the equilibrium in the real sector and the monetary sector in an
economy;
 explain the underlying ideas behind the IS curve;
 explain the underlying ideas behind the LM curve;
 explain how the IS and LM curves interact;
 identify factors that influence the position and slope of the IS and the LM
curves;
 derive aggregate demand (AD) curve from the IS-LM model; and
 find out the factors that influence the AD curve.
3.1 INTRODUCTION 
In Unit 2 we discussed how the equilibrium level of output is determined in the 
Keynesian model. Recall that Keynes came up with his analysis in the aftermath 
of the Great Depression. He considered an economy with underutilization of 
resources (i.e., presence of idle capacity) with an objective of correcting the 
P
rof. Kaustuva Barik, Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi 
