--- Page 11 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
12 
strength of each method and by combining their respective strengths within one 
single research design. The argument of incompatibility between two methods 
on philosophical ground is not valid because of the following reasons: 
(Bergman, 2008) 
i) The QL and QN methods represent large and heterogeneous familities of 
methods which vary within their own family to such an extent that it is 
difficult to identify unique set of qualities or attributes that encompasses the 
characteristics of one family of methods, clearly distinct from the 
characteristics of the members of the other family. Most characteristics 
encompass either only a subgroup of members of the family or are also 
applicable to some members of other family. Hence there is a need to re-
think the division of labour between QL and QN methods in order to better 
understand the possibilities and functions of methods to better justify and 
apply mixed method design. 
ii) The proposition of existence of one single reality under QN method is 
inconsistent with research applications. The emergent structures are based 
on co-construction between the researchers’ selection and understanding of 
items in a questionnaire, their choice of analytic strategy and their 
interpretation of the statistical output on the one hand, and the way the 
respondents interpreted the survey questions with the given social, political, 
historical and economic context, on the other hand. 
From a methodological perspective, it is not proper to declare one approach 
more or less valid, valuable or scientific. Instead how to understand and 
analyze data need to be based to a large extent on the consistency formed 
between how to understand data in conjunction with the specific research 
question, rationale, aim etc. only in connection with the specificities of the 
research goals it makes sense to delimit the nature of reality. Thus, the 
decision on whether the researcher deals with one single reality, a 
constructed reality, multiple realities, multiple constructed realities or a co-
constructed reality is unrelated to whether patterns in the data are detected 
via statistical analysis or otherwise. 
iii) A small vs large samples : The sample size for many QN studies is often 
quite small and sample size for some QL studies can indeed be large. 
iv) Regarding hypothesis testing, many researchers engaged in QL research, 
pursue conjectures that are embedded either in their research questions, the 
kind and the way they collect data, the way they analyse the data and the 
way, they protect themselves from selective reportings of their findings. In 
many types of well-established statical analyses, the QN methods like 
cluster analysis, factor analysis, correspondence analysis, multi-
dimensional scaling are used in exploring data structures. 
In order to avoid misconceptions and mistakes while deciding the research 
design issues, the following points need to be kept in mind. 
a) We refrain ourselves from making specific argument for or against the QL 
and QN method for a specific research project. We need to focus our efforts 
more explicitly on embedding and justifying our selected methods 
according to our research questions, data needs, theoretical grounding and 
research design. 


--- Page 12 ---
 
 
13
Research Design and 
Mixed Methods 
Research
b) Data collection methods (i.e. unstructured narrative interview, survey 
research based on closed-ended questions) and data analysis methods 
(qualitative content analysis, discourse analysis, quantitative content 
analysis) should be differentiated. 
c) We ought to be more aware of the actual inductive and deductive analytic 
phases of our research projects. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) Which constituent of research study does guide the research design? 
 ……………………………………………………………………………… 
 ……………………………………………………………………………… 
 ……………………………………………………………………………… 
2) State the functions of research design? 
 ……………………………………………………………………………… 
 ……………………………………………………………………………… 
 ……………………………………………………………………………… 
3) What is the distinction between Mono Method and Mixed Method? 
 ……………………………………………………………………………… 
 ……………………………………………………………………………… 
 ……………………………………………………………………………… 
 ……………………………………………………………………………… 
6.6 THE RATIONALE FOR MIXED METHODS 
RESEARCH 
Mixed methods research has gained tremendous popularity in the social, 
behavioural and related sciences in recent years. This increasing popularity of 
mixed methods research is reflected in terms of the claims by mixed method 
researchers, increase in the publications on this topic and the inclusion of 
mixed methods designs in the text books. The argument for combining 
qualitative and quantitative methods is put forwarded on the following grounds. 
i) The research methods associated with both quantitative and qualitative 
research have their own strengths and weaknesses. Combining them 
allows the researchers to offset their weakness to draw on the strengths of 
both. 
ii) Mixed methods designs enable the researcher to provide a comprehensive 
account of the area of the enquiry in which he or she is interested if both 
quantitative and qualitative methods are used. for example, causal 
explanation of any event or phenomena can be captured by quantitative 
methods whereas the reason explanation and pattern explanation or the 
explanation involving processes can better be captured by qualitative 
methods. 


--- Page 13 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
14 
iii) Quantitative and qualitative methods be used to answer different 
questions in a study. Further mixed methods can be utilized in order to 
gain complementary views about the same phenomenon or relationship. 
Research question for the two strands of the mixed study address related 
aspects of the same phenomenon. 
iv) Mixed methods design can be used to develop the research further. 
Questions for one strand emerge from the inferences of a previous one 
(sequential mixed methods), or one strand provides hypothesis to be 
tested in the next one. 
v) Mixed methods may also be used to assess the credibility of inferences 
obtained from one approach (strand). Exploratory and explanatory/ 
confirmatory questions in such situation, may be useful. 
vi) Mixed methods are also used to obtain divergent pictures of the same 
phenomenon. These divergent findings can ideally be compared and 
contrasted. 
vii) Quantitative research provides an account of structures in social life but 
qualitative research provides sense of process. 
viii) Mixed methods research entails to generate hypothesis by using 
qualitative method and testing the hypothesis resorting quantitative 
method within a single project. 
ix) Mixed methods research enables to present diversity of views i.e. combining 
researchers’ and participants’ perspectives through quantitative and 
qualitative research respectively by way of uncovering relationships between 
variables through quantitative research and revealing meaning among 
research participants through qualitative research. 
6.7 FORM OF MIXED METHODS RESEARCH 
DESIGNS 
Connecting qualitative and quantitative methods through sequencing and 
prioritising, there can be four forms of mixed methods research designs. 
1) Preliminary qualitative inputs to core quantitative method (qual-
QUANT): With a view to use the strengths of qualitative methods to 
contribute to core quantitative methods, preliminary qualitative methods are 
used for collecting and interpreting the quantitative data. Preliminary 
qualitative methods can also be used as an input to generate hypotheses, 
develop content for questionnaires etc. 
2) Supplementary qualitative method as a follow up to core quantitative 
method (QUANT-qual): Supplementary qualitative method as a follow up 
to core quantitative method can be used to extend what is learned from 
quantitative study. It can demonstrate bases for results, examine reasons for 
failed hypotheses, explore the theoretical significance of outliers and so on. 
3) Preliminary quantitative inputs to core qualitative methods design 
(quan-QUAL): The study undertaken by using core quantitative method 
design gets inputs by way of using preliminary quantitative method for 
collecting and interpreting the qualitative data. Preliminary quantitative 


--- Page 14 ---
 
 
15
Research Design and 
Mixed Methods 
Research
method can also locate major differences between sub-groups, guide 
purposive sampling, establish results to pursue and so on. 
4) Supplementary quantitative method to core qualitative method design 
(QUAL-quan): Supplementary qualitative method as a follow up to core 
qualitative method can be used to develop measures of key concepts and 
relationships across different samples. 
6.8 CASE STUDIES OF MIXED METHODS 
RESEARCH DESIGN 
i) Studies where the quantitative component is dominant in terms of the 
framework of positivism and post positivism paradigm and inductive and 
deductive logic of enquiry guides the study, quantitative approach is more 
dominant and the researchers specialize in quantitative work. In such 
studies, qualitative data and their manipulation are shaped by the nature of 
research questions raised in the quantitative part of the project. The 
qualitative data are treated and transformed in effect into quantitative 
variables with the purpose of fleshing out the explanations required for the 
quantitative results. In such cases quantitative component follows 
qualitative component mixed methods. An illustration of a Research Study 
which has used Mixed Method pre dominated by the Quantitative Method 
is given below in the box: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CASE 1:  Mixed Method Research Design: Conducted the study within 
the framework of post positivist paradigm using inductive 
logic of inquiry and analyzing the qualitative data by 
quantitative technique of data analysis 
Study: ‘Decent Work: Concept, Measurement and Status in India’: 
Ph.D thesis by Ms. Nausheen Nizami Ph.D Research Scholar, 
(Economics) IGNOU, N. Delhi  
 
The study was conducted within the framework of positivist paradigm using 
inductive logic of enquiry with the objectives to (i) examine the applicability 
of indicators of ‘decent work in India (ii) develop indicators and tools to 
measure ‘decent work (iii) evaluate the status of decent work in IT 
companies and to identify the socio-economic attributes influencing status of 
decent work, and (iv) know the employer’s perspective in provision of 
decent work’. 
Methodology: Decent work sums up the aspirations of the people in their 
professional life and is a revolutionary agenda of International Labour 
Office. Decent work is any such work which ensures provision of fair and 
free employment to all men and women of economically productive age-
group in conditions of fairness, equity, security and dignity. It is a 
multidimensional concept that applies to both formal and informal sectors of 
an economy. The study is based on primary data collected through well 
designed questionnaire and telephonic interviews. Measurement of decent 
work was undertaken using both quantitative and qualitative methods of data 
analysis. A characteristic feature of this study was to transform the 
qualitative data in a manner so as to be able to use quantitative techniques of 
data analysis. 
 


--- Page 15 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Quantitative Techniques to analyse qualitative data 
a) Composite Index construction for Decent Work 
With a view to measure the extent and range of decent work 
provision, decent work indices were constructed. These indices have 
been made for all the indicators of decent work used in this study by 
coding, normalising and aggregating the responses as the data was 
qualitative in nature.  Thereafter, the standard formula developed by 
United Nation’s Development Pr ogramme (UNDP) for the 
construction of HDI and other indices was applied.  
b)  Factor analysis of decent work indicators 
The technique of factor-analysis was adopted to short-list the most 
relevant and reliable indicators of decent work. The principal 
component method was used to outline components (i.e. indicators in 
this study) explaining the maximum variance in the dependent 
variable. 
c) Phi ф Coefficient of Correlation Analysis 
Since the variables were dichotomous in nature, correlation analysis 
was attempted  to test whether there was statistically significant 
associations between the responses on different decent work 
indicators. Partial correlation analysis examined the relationship 
between few socio-demographic variables and composite Decent 
work Index keeping the effect of other variables constant. 
d) Chi-square test for independence 
Chi-square test was conducted to test the independence of the results 
between the two scales of Decent work index (For example, 0 and 
 
0-1) and results of each decent work indicator for those two scales.  
Thus an efficient mix of quantitative and qualitative methods 
were used to deal with the key issues related to decent work in 
this doctoral thesis. 
Major Results: 
1) Composite decent work index reflects deficit in the status of 
decent work for a vast majority (94%) of IT employees. 
2) Adequacy of earnings and productive employment are directly 
associated with decent work which is in consonance with the 
features of search and matching theory of employment. 
3) Longer working hours have a significant impact on the physical 
and emotional well-being of an employee. A vast majority of IT 
employees (95%) were found to be working for longer hours. 
4) Work-life balance and adequate earning and productive 
employment were found to be correlated. Majority of the 
employees in IT sector were found to be earning adequate 
earnings but their work-life balance was disrupted owing to 
several reasons including longer working hours. This implies that 
higher earnings of the employees in the  IT industry are necessary  


--- Page 16 ---
 
 
17
Research Design and 
Mixed Methods 
Research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ii) S
tudies where qualitative component had priority in terms of the frame 
work of interpretative paradigm and abductive logic of enquiry. In such 
situations, the researchers identify themselves primarily as qualitative 
researchers. In such studies, the tools used for data/information collection is 
mixed in nature. The modalities of the different types of data are 
maintained and are not treated as commensurate. Integration of data takes 
place as a part of interpretative process referred to as analytic or 
interpretative integration. In such studies quantitative techniques can be 
used to analyse the perceptions of the people which may be qualitative in 
nature. An illustration of the research study using mix of qualitative and 
quantitative methods in the manner discussed here in is given below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
but not a sufficient condition for the employees. Their higher earnings 
are not resulting into their well-being (mental) as reflected in their 
deteriorating health status and imbalance between professional and 
personal lives.  
5) Social security mechanisms, social dialogue and fair treatment at work 
places are major aspects of decent work owing to ensure sustainability 
of economic well-being of the employees. 
6) Decent work reflects decent work place but a decent work place may 
not always translate into decent work because of the gap of the nature 
of work and work amenities and environment. This implies that deficit 
in decent work to the employees is correlated with deficit in decent 
work places. 
7) Age and social class are the prominent attributes in influencing decent 
work status.  
8) Despite the presence of premier educational institutions like IITs, 
RECs, etc. demand-supply gap in the available manpower for IT 
industry is the major concern of the employers pushing them to face the 
problem of adverse selection. A direct implication of this situation  is 
the low employment elasticity of IT industry with respect to its growth 
and increasing contribution to GDP.  
CASE 2: Mixed Methods Research Design: Conducted the study 
within the framework of Qualitative Research Approach 
using Quantitative Methods for data analysis 
Study: Gender specific impacts of climate variation in Agriculture: 
By Mamta Mehar, Ph.D Research Scholar, IGNOU, N. Delhi 
The Main Objective of the study was to understand the gender differences 
in agriculture and analyse the linkages between gender and climate 
variation using mixed method approach. The research questions addressed 
in this study were: (i) Does there exist difference in gender perception on 
climate variability? (ii) Whether male and female farmers follow similar 
coping strategies to mitigate risk and shocks in agriculture? The study 
focused on to understand how gender and climate variation in agriculture 
are interrelated with the support of empirical evidences.  


--- Page 17 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Methodology 
This study was conducted within the framework of qualitative approach 
anchored in interpretative paradigm using quantitative methods – 
questionnaire as a tool and survey as a method to collect the data and 
multivariate probit model to find out probability in deciding adaption 
strategy by male and female to climate variability. 
This research study used case study method within a socio-cultural 
framework. Case study methodology derives much of its rationale and 
methods from ethnography characterized by  “an instance in action” in a 
“real life context when the boundaries between the phenomenon and 
context are not clear”. Keeping in view, the logic of enquiry, the research 
questions were analysed using both qualitative and quantitative methods. 
The qualitative analysis was done within the framework of “Interpretative 
paradigm of qualitative research”. Since the research objective was to 
understand human behaviour within the surrounding context of climate 
change, where it was difficult to isolate  the phenomena of climate 
variation and perception of males and females towards it, conducting of the 
present study under interpretive paradigm was appropriate. The associated 
research strategy used in this study was abduction. Abduction is the logic 
used to construct descriptions and explanations that are grounded in the 
everyday activities as well as in the language and meanings used by social 
actors. The social actors in the present proposal are men and women 
farmers, and their activities to be analysed are specific to decision making 
in climate change situation. The interpretative paradigm using abduction 
strategy was done via literature review as well as synthesis from findings 
of focus group discussion during the survey. In the wake of theoretical 
understanding, it was tried to quantify the impact using appropriate 
empirical analysis and using data from a baseline survey conducted by 
CCAFS in 2013 of 641 farm households in twelve villages of Vaishali 
districts in Bihar, India; it was attempted to quantify the gender 
differentiated impact. 
Results 
The linkage between gender and climate variation in agriculture was more 
influenced from subjective experiences of individuals or society. The 
movement of understanding “is constantly from the whole to the part and 
back to the whole” (Gadamer, 1976). According to Gadamer, it is a 
circular relationship. Since the study aims to understand the perception of 
human in context of climate variation, it cannot be explained entirely by 
any scientific paradigm where hypothesis are pre-structured and to some 
extent results are known. The interpretative paradigm points out that 
positivism, in its first attempt to model the social after the natural sciences, 
fails to see that unlike nature, social reality exists only insofar as lay 
members create that reality in meaningful interaction (Fuchs S., 1992: 
198). But the point of interpretive paradigm is that we must first 
understand social worlds from within, before we develop scientific models 
and explanations (Fuchs, S. 1992: 205). According to Willis (1995) 
interpretivists are anti-foundationalists, who believe there is no single 
correct route or particular method to knowledge. Walsham (1995) argues 
that in the interpretive tradition there are no ‘correct’ or ‘incorrect’ 
theories. Instead, they should be judged according to how ‘interesting’ they 
are to the researcher as well as those involved in the same areas. 


--- Page 18 ---
 
 
19
Research Design and 
Mixed Methods 
Research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The linkages between gender and climate variation in context of 
agriculture are bi-directional. Changes in climate event effect agriculture 
through reduction in yield, increase in occurrence of pests or crop disease, 
changes in time of activities for example, changes in winter time could 
result in change in harvesting or sowing days of respective crops. All this 
affects farmers’ livelihood and work activity in different ways. For 
example, women (and children) being the ones traditionally charged with 
water collection roles, have to travel longer distances after drought. 
Evidences suggest decrease in yield and thereby total availability of food 
consumption in a household basket usually has been seen as 
complemented by reduction in meals of female. This exposes them to 
health issues. Male farmers are usually seen to migrate in search of 
nonfarm opportunities outside their village domain, putting all burden or 
responsibilities on women.  Moreover mostly in rural areas women are 
less likely to get education as compare to male, they are less allowed to 
mobile and do more household related activities, and they have less 
control over the family assets.  
The other direction of gender differentiated impacts in context of climate 
events in agriculture can be viewed through understanding their coping 
strategies. The adaption of particular strategies are often influenced by the 
priorities and options available for women and men for coping these 
strategies. Constraints on women’s mobility, and behavioural restrictions 
hinders their ability to make decision on various matters and thus they 
have less choices of coping strategies available. Additionally inequitable 
access to assets and resources such as land, knowledge, technology, 
limited power in decision-making, education, health care and food have 
been identified as determinant factors behind adaptation of different 
coping  strategies of male versus female. The results of quantitative 
analysis also supports this argument. 
The females are mostly illiterate (71 per cent) and have little access to 
resources. Only 9 per cent of farm household have reported to provide 
land entitlement to at least one female member. Additionally the gender 
power dynamics is seen to favour only one gender i.e. male. The decision 
making role in different household related expenditures as well as in 
agriculture activities is dominated by male. Considering the perception of 
male vis-à-vis female farmer about effects of climate change has shown a 
similar pattern. More than 90 per cent of farmers are aware about climate 
variation and feels that weather conditions adversely affect their 
agriculture activities. However again, the decisions to cope with the risk 
due to climate have suggested different behaviour, priorities by male and 
female. Survey results suggest that almost 60 per cent of surveyed farmers 
have adapted at least one coping strategy and in total adoption of more 
than 30 coping strategies are reported. The results of multivariate probit 
model suggest that male farmers have higher probability in deciding 
adaptations through additional jobs as well as specific agriculture 
strategies such as crop rotation and use of hybrid seed in farming 
practices. 


--- Page 19 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
20 
iii) Studies presenting diversity of views i.e. combining researcher’s and 
participants’ perspectives through quantitative and qualitative research. 
Researchers uncover relationship between variables through quantitative 
methods and reveal meaning among research participants through 
qualitative methods. Thus a comprehensive account of the area of the 
enquiry is presented. An illustration of the study using this form of mixed 
method research is given below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CASE 3:  Mixed Method Research –used Quantitative Methods for data 
analysis and Qualitative Methods for revealing and 
understanding participants’ perspective on quality of education 
Study: ‘Measuring Quality of Education and Its Determinants: Indian 
Context’: Ph.D thesis submitted by Ms. Charu Jain, Ph.D 
Research Scholar, (Economics) IGNOU, New Delhi 
The study was carried out with the objectives to (i) examine the linkages of 
secondary education with various socio-economic outcomes at all India 
level and state level, (ii) identify various determinants (including students’ 
family background characteristics, and schools’ characteristics) affecting 
students’ performances and teaching efficiencies in senior secondary 
schools in Delhi.  To fulfill these objectives, both quantitative and 
qualitative research approaches were applied.  
Quantitative Method: The quantitative approach was used to test the 
hypothesis generated. Two set of questionnaires one related to the teachers 
and the other to students were got filled up through in-depth face to face 
interviews with the respondents. The student questionnaire was translated in 
Hindi language to enhance the understanding level of students in Hindi 
medium government schools in Delhi. Within translation procedure, the 
student questionnaire was first translated in Hindi and thereafter re-
translated in English to re-check the accuracy and meaning of questions. 
The teachers’ questionnaire was provided in English language only. The 
information thus retrieved from these questionnaires was used to measure 
the performance of students and teacher analyzing thereby the overall 
quality of education at lower secondary and senior secondary levels of 
education. The information collected through quantitative approach was 
statistically analyzed and tested using various statistical softwares like 
SPSS and STATA? 
Qualitative Method: In the qualitative approach, direct observation 
method and key informer interviews were used to supplement the 
information/data collected through quantitative method by way of two sets 
of structured questionnaires. Qualitative research method enabled the 
researcher to approach the research topic from the perspective of teachers 
and students. Further,  the qualitative techniques were used to examine 
social processes which otherwise could not have been captured by 
traditional quantitative measures. 
The direct observation technique  enabled researcher to learn about the 
behaviour of the people under study: students and teachers in the natural 
setting i.e. schools through observing. It gave the researcher the first hand 
information on the quality aspects of school and classrooms and working 
conditions for teachers, which were quite useful in doing the analysis.  


--- Page 20 ---
 
 
21
Research Design and 
Mixed Methods 
Research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The field notes, which were taken down during the period of fieldwork, were 
instrumental during analysis and interpretation of the results, as they helped in 
recalling the incidents that took place at the time of data collection. Face-to-
face interviews with the key informants were also conducted within 
qualitative approach.  Key informant interviews were qualitative informal 
interviews with people who knew what was going on in the community. Our 
purpose of conducting key informant interviews was to collect information 
from people who had firsthand knowledge about the overall functioning of 
school. The key informers in the sample schools were selected using 
purposive sampling technique and in this case the key informants were either 
senior teacher in school or senior administrative person in schools. 
Interviewing key informants enabled the researcher to look at the underlying 
issues and problems with varying perspectives. These interviews were 
conducted using an informal approach. Initially the questions were drafted in 
a form of well designed open ended short questionnaire for conducting face 
to face interviews with the respondents. One respondent or a group of 2-3 
people from each school were selected purposively for gathering this 
information, depending upon how well they were informed about the school.  
Apart from these informal interviews, the school guards/receptionists were 
also contacted informally to gather the information on schools. The 
information thus collected through qualitative approach was first entered in 
Excel in a pre-designed format and then coded so that it can be further 
analysed statistically. Moreover, the responses to few open ended questions 
were reviewed and inferences were drawn which were quite useful in 
providing suggestions and recommendation for this study. 
Main Results 
1) Secondary education increases income level of individuals to a significant 
extent. One unit increase in Gross Enrollment Ratio (GER) at secondary 
level leads to increase in the personal disposable income by 0.65 units. 
2) The educational background of households determine their occupational 
pattern. The households with at least secondary education are either 
salaried or business class, while those with elementary level of education 
are more concentrated in agricultural/wage earning activities. Higher the level 
of education among females, greater the proportion of female work 
participation rate. 
3) Secondary education bears highest impact on improving health 
indicators. Secondary education has high potential for bringing 
demographic transitions in terms of decline in maternal mortality rates, 
infant mortality rates, fertility rates, death rates etc. 
4) Secondary education attainment brings behavioral changes in individuals 
in terms of higher savings and diversion in the expenditure pattern. 
5) School resources, teachers and teaching quality, student’s family 
background, mass media exposure and self motivational factors of 
students determine their outcome to significant extent.  
6) Within school characteristics, cleanliness in school, well qualified 
teachers their friendly and supportive attitude with students and quality 
of school infrastructure influence students performance positively. Lack 
of student motivation, large class size, lack of school resources and 
facilities, lack of adequate teaching material affect the teaching abilities 
adversely. 


--- Page 21 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
22 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) Give two situations where Mixed Method research is superior to Mono 
Method? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
2) Give an example of Mixed Method where qualitative method pre-
dominates quantitative method? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
3) State the different forms of Mixed Methods? 
 ……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
6.9 LET US SUM UP 
Traditionally two distinct research approaches – Quantitative (QN) and 
Qualitative (QL) – have been followed in undertaking research in social 
sciences. The former is associated with positivism and post positivism 
paradigm and the latter principally with interpretative paradigm and critical 
theory paradigm. Depending upon the nature and field of specialization 
research studies may be of various types. Important among these are – 
theoretical and applied, descriptive and explanatory, conceptual and empirical, 
exploratory and experimental etc. 
Research design is a logical structure of enquiry specifying the types of 
evidences needed to answer the research questions. Research methods are made 
of tools for data collection, type of data, sampling design, sample size, 
techniques for data analysis etc. There is nothing intransic about any research 
design that requires a particular method of data collection. Research Methods 
can broadly be of two types – Mono Methods and Mixed Methods. Within 
mono methods, it can be either quantitative or qualitative. The combination of 
at least one qualitative and at least one quantitative component in a single 
research project is known as mixed methods research. The mixed methods have 
gained popularity in carrying out research in social and behavioral sciences 
because combining them allows the researchers (i) to offset their (QN and QL 
methods) weaknesses, (ii) provide comprehensive account of the area of the 
enquiry, (iii) to answer different types of questions. Studies undertaken under 
mixed methods can be of four types – (i) preliminary quantitative methods 
