--- Page 1 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Block 
 
 
 
RESEARCH DESIGN AND MEASUREMENT 
UNIT 6 
Research Design and Mixed Methods Research         5 
UNIT 7 
Data Collection and Sampling Design 25 
UNIT 8 
Measurement and Scaling Techniques 53  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
MEC-109
Research Methods 
in EconomicsIndira Gandhi  
National Open University 
School of Social Sciences 
2 


--- Page 2 ---
Expert Committee 
 
Prof. D.N. Reddy     Prof. Romar Korea 
Rtd. Professor of Economics    Professor of Economics 
University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad   University of Mumbai, Mumbai 
 
Prof. Harishankar Asthana    Dr. Manish Gupta   
Professor of Psychology    Sr. Economist 
Banaras Hindu University    National Institute of Public Finance and Policy 
Varanasi      New Delhi 
 
Prof. Chandan Mukherjee    Prof. Anjila Gupta    
Professor and Dean     Professor of Economics 
School of Development Studies   IGNOU, New Delhi   
Ambedkar University, New Delhi   
        
Prof. V.R. Panchmukhi    Prof. Narayan Prasad ( Convenor) 
Rtd. Professor of Economics    Professor of Economics 
Bombay University and Former   IGNOU, New Delhi 
Chairman ICSSR, New Delhi 
 
Prof. Achal Kumar Gaur    Prof. K. Barik   
Professor of Economics    Professor of Economics 
Faculty of Social Sciences    IGNOU, New Delhi  
Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi 
 
Prof. P.K. Chaubey     Dr. B.S. Prakash    
Professor, Indian Institute of    Associate Professor in Economics  
Public Administration, New Delhi   IGNOU, New Delhi 
 
Shri S.S. Suryanarayana    Shri Saugato Sen  
Rtd. Joint Advisor     Associate Professor in Economics 
Planning Commission, New Delhi   IGNOU, New Delhi 
Course Coordinator and Editor: Prof. Narayan Prasad 
Block Preparation Team 
 
Unit Resource Person     Editor    
      (Format, Language and Content) 
 
6 Prof. Narayan Prasad   Prof. Narayan Prasad   
 
Professor of Economics   Professor of Economics   
 IGNOU, New Delhi   IGNOU, New Delhi 
 
7 Sai S.S. Suryanarayan   Prof. Narayan Prasad 
 
Rtd. Joint Advisor    Professor of Economics 
 Planning Commission, New Delhi  IGNOU, New Delhi 
 
8 Prof. A.K. Gaur    Prof. H.S. Asthana 
Professor of Economics   Professor of Psychology 
 BHU, Varanasi    BHU, Varanasi 
           & 
 Prof. Narayan Prasad  
 Professor of Economics, IGNOU, New Delhi 
 
Print Production 
Mr. Manjit Singh 
Section Officer (Pub.) 
SOSS, IGNOU, New Delhi 
October, 2015 
© Indira Gandhi National Open University, 2015 
ISBN-978-81-266- 
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced in any form, by mimeograph or any other 
means, without permission in writing from the Indira Gandhi National Open University. 
Further information on Indira Gandhi National Open University courses may be obtained from the 
University's office at Maidan Garhi. New Delhi-110 068. 
Printed and published on behalf of the Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi by the 
Director, School of Social Sciences. 
Laser Typeset by : Tessa Media & Computers, C-206, A.F.E.-II, Okhla, New Delhi 
Printed at : 


--- Page 3 ---
 
BLOCK 2 RESEARCH DESIGN AND 
MEASUREMENT 
Research design is a logical structure of an enquiry and its formulation is 
guided and determined by the research questions raised in the problem under 
investigation. Apart from specifying the logical structure of data, research 
design also test and eliminate alternative explanation. Broadly, the 
observational design sampling design and statistical design are covered in 
Research Design. The various attributes of people, objects or concepts are 
being increasingly included in explanation of human behaviour in Economics. 
Hence, these individual traits, attitudes need to measure for deeper analysis. 
Research Design and measurement issues, therefore constitute the theme of this 
block. The block comprises of 3 Units. 
Throwing light on the concept of research design and various types of research, 
Unit 6 covers the rationale and forms of mixed methods research with 
illustration of three case studies. 
Unit 7 provides comprehensive knowledge of all the elements for collecting 
the quantitative data for research study. It covers the methods and tools of data 
collection and the various issues related to sampling design. 
Unit 8 deals with the various measurement scales, scaling techniques, and 
criteria for good measurement and sources of errors in measurement. 
 


--- Page 4 ---
 
 
5
Research Design and 
Mixed Methods 
ResearchUNIT 6 RESEARCH DESIGN AND MIXED 
METHODS RESEARCH                 
Structure 
6.0 Objectives  
6.1 Introduction 
6.2 Types of Research 
6.2.1 Theoretical and Applied Research 
6.2.2 Descriptive and Explanatory Research 
6.2.3 Quantitative and Qualitative Research  
6.2.4 Conceptual and Empirical Research 
6.2.5 Other Types of Research 
6.3 Research Design 
6.4 Research Design vs. Research Methods 
6.5 Research Methods 
 6.5.1 Quantitative Methods 
 6.5.2 Qualitative Methods 
 6.5.3 Mixed Methods 
6.6 The Rationale for Mixed Methods Research 
6.7 Forms of Mixed Methods Research Designs 
6.8 Case Studies of Mixed Methods Research Design 
6.9 Let Us Sum Up 
6.10 Some Useful Books 
6.11 Answers or Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
6.0 OBJECTIVES 
After going through this Unit, you will be able to: 
• state the various types of research; 
• explain the concept and meaning of research design; 
• make a distinction between research design and research methods; 
• delineate the characteristics of quantitative research and qualitative research; 
• discuss the purposes of mixed methods research; and 
• appreciate the application of mixed methods research in conducting 
research studies in social sciences in general and economics in particular. 
6.1 INTRODUCTION 
Due to confusion or lack of clarity between research design and research 
methods, we often use these two terms interchangeably. As a result, the 
research design is evaluated on the basis of strengths and weakness of the 
method rather its ability to draw relatively unambiguous conclusions. Hence 
 


--- Page 5 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
6 
efforts have been made here to throw light on the distinction between these two 
terms. Traditionally two approaches – quantitative research (QN) associated 
with post positivist paradigm and qualitative research (QL) associated with 
interpretative paradigm have been followed in social sciences. However, in 
recent years increasing reliance on mixed methods research by combining 
quantitative and qualitative methods in a single research project has been 
observed. Hence in this unit, the concept of mixed method research, its types 
and application have been covered. Application of mixed method research in a 
subject like economics which is essentially quantitative in nature have been 
illustrated by case studies. Before taking up the issue of research design and 
research method, it is desirable to have an idea about various types of research. 
Hence let us begin to introduce the various types of research.   
6.2 TYPES OF RESEARCH 
There are different ‘types of research’ depending on their nature and field of 
specialization. While a classification based on a dichotomous distinction (like, 
theoretical/applied, descriptive/analytical, conceptual/empirical, etc.) is 
possible, it is necessary to recognize that there may be overlapping features 
rendering such a classification less perfect to that extent.  It is, therefore, useful 
to first of all take a look at the underlying basic features so as to be able to 
identify the different types of research within their respective connotations and 
usage. 
A variable which can be measured can take values or scores either in 
quantitative or qualitative terms.  For instance, yield of an agricultural output, 
height/weight of individuals, etc. can be measured and expressed in 
quantitative terms. On the other hand, characteristics like one’s feelings or 
opinion (e.g., good/bad, male/female, agreeing/disagreeing, yes/no, etc.) are 
attributes on which a choice can be expressed (and a score assigned) depending 
on the possible alternatives or choices.  Thus, variables like the performance of 
an artist, respondent’s gender, etc. on which responses can only be categorized 
or grouped are ‘qualitative variables’ . From this angle, variables on which 
data can be collected and expressed in quantified terms may be called as 
‘quantitative variables ’. Even variables which are expressed in qualitative 
terms can be counted whereupon their total numbers become quantified 
expressions. A popular example of developmental economics which ranks 
different countries based on their status attained in a number of 
areas/variables(some of which like the political freedom/choice enjoyed by the 
country, though expressed in some quantitative measure, is qualitative in its 
nature) is the human development index.  In actual research (particularly 
research in the field of social sciences), it is important to note that variables of 
both the nature normally co-exist.  In view of this, the analysis pertaining to 
each type of variable/data needs different methods and techniques. 
The type of research would also vary depending on the objectives of the study.  
Research design varies with the type of research one likes to pursue.  With this 
background, we can now proceed to know the distinctions between different 
types of research. 
6.2.1 Theoretical and Applied Research 
Research can either be theoretical or applied. The former i.e., theoretical 
research can also be considered as ‘fundamental research’ as its outcome serves 


--- Page 6 ---
 
 
7
Research Design and 
Mixed Methods 
Research
as a foundation for all subsequent development in the field.  Fundamental (or 
basic) research mainly concerns with formulation of theory with knowledge 
perceived as an end in itself. It, thus, aims at obtaining knowledge of the 
logical processes involved in a phenomenon. It pertains to the quest for 
knowledge about a phenomenon without concern for its practical use. Such a 
research may either verify the old theory or establish a new one.  For example, 
fundamental research in economics may consist of research to develop and 
improve economic theories or evolve quantitative techniques to measure 
parameters such as multiplier effect, elasticity of demand and supply, etc.  
Fundamental research is essentially positive in nature. 
Applied research, on the other hand, aims at finding a solution for a problem 
facing society or industry. It is, thus, applied to practical situations or contexts.   
While pure research discovers principles and laws, applied research discovers 
ways of applying them to solve specific problems.  It is useful to test the 
theories developed empirically and can as a result also contribute to improving 
the tools and techniques of measurement. Basic research, therefore, can be 
treated as building blocks for applied research. Illustrations of applied research 
in economics can be measurement of poverty, employment, rural development, 
agriculture, environment, etc. 
6.2.2 Descriptive and Explanatory Research 
Descriptive research describes a situation, events or social systems. It aims to 
describe the state of affairs as it exists. Surveys and fact-finding enquiries of 
different kinds are part of descriptive research. Survey methods of all kinds 
including comparative and correlational methods are used in descriptive 
research studies.  A survey of socio-economic conditions of rural/urban labour 
is an area of descriptive research. In descriptive research studies, the 
researchers have no control over variable. They can report only what has 
happened or is happening.  Descriptive research deals with questions like ‘how 
does X vary with Y?  or ‘how does malnutrition vary with age and sex?, etc. 
Explanatory research, aims at establishing the cause and effect relationship.  
The researcher uses the facts or information already available to analyse and 
make a critical evaluation of the data/information. An example of explanatory 
research is: ‘whether increase in agricultural productivity is explained by 
improved rural roads?’ 
6.2.3 Quantitative and Qualitative Research 
Quantitative Research  is the systematic and scientific investigation of 
quantitative properties and phenomena and their relationships. The objective of 
quantitative research is to develop mathematical models, and to test 
hypotheses. Based on ontological and epistomological premises, quantitative 
research is characterized by the following attributes: 
• A belief in a single reality. 
• The pursuit of identifying universal laws. 
• Separation of knower (researcher) from known (researched). 
• The possibility and necessacity of value free research. 
• Pursuit of universal laws (findings) beyond the limit of research/social 
context. 


--- Page 7 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
8 
• The tendency to work with large, representative sample. 
• An emphasis on deductive research via falsifiable hypothesis. 
• Formal hypothesis testing. 
In contrast,  Qualitative Research  captures a set of purposes associated with 
meaning and interpretation. Stress is laid on the socially constructed nature of 
reality, the intimate relationship between the research and researched and 
situational constraints that shape the enquiry. The key attributes associated with 
qualitative research are: 
• A belief in a constructed reality, multiple realities, co-existence realities. 
• An interdependence between the knower and the known. 
• Impossibility to separate the researcher from the research subject. 
• Heavy role of context in research process. 
• The impossibility to generalize research findings beyond the limits of the 
immediate context. 
• Non-separation of cause and effect. 
• The explicit focus on inductive, exploratory research approaches. 
• The tendency to work with small and purposely chosen sampling. 
• Analyses holistic system. 
6.2.4 Conceptual and Empirical Research 
Conceptual research is related to abstract ideas or theory.  It is generally used 
by philosophers and thinkers to develop new concepts or to reinterpret the 
existing theories. 
Empirical research relies on experience or observation. It is data based. It is 
subject to verification by observation and experiment. This type of research is 
particularly useful when validation or verification of an aspect is required. 
6.2.5  Other Types of Research 
Research may be exploratory or formalized. Exploratory research aims at 
developing the hypothesis rather than testing a pre-conceived hypothetical 
contention or notion. Formalised research studies deal with a definitive 
structure within which specific hypotheses are tested. Historical research  
utilizes existing documents to study events of the past. Research can also be 
experimental or evaluative. Experimental research aims at identifying the 
causal factors by means of experiments. In evaluative research , the cost 
effectiveness of a programme is examined. Such research addresses the 
question of the efficiency of a programme and are useful in taking policy 
decisions on issues like whether the programme is effective and/or needs 
modification or re-orientation?  Whether it should be continued? 
Action research is another type of research. It deals with real world problems 
aimed at finding out practical solutions or answers to them.  It gathers feedback 
which is then used to generate ideas for improvement. You will find details on 
Action Research in Unit 20. 


--- Page 8 ---
 
 
9
Research Design and 
Mixed Methods 
Research
Check Your Progress 1 
1) Distinguish between quantitative variable and qualitative variable. 
…………………………………………………………………………….. 
…………………………………………………………………………….. 
…………………………………………………………………………….. 
2) State the main objectives of applied research? 
…………………………………………………………………………….. 
…………………………………………………………………………….. 
…………………………………………………………………………….. 
3) In what sense quantitative research is different from qualitative research? 
…………………………………………………………………………….. 
…………………………………………………………………………….. 
…………………………………………………………………………….. 
4) What is the distinction between explanatory and descriptive research? 
…………………………………………………………………………….. 
…………………………………………………………………………….. 
…………………………………………………………………………….. 
6.3 RESEARCH DESIGN 
Research design is a logical structure of an enquiry. Given the research 
question or theory, what type of evidence is needed to answer the question (or 
to test the theory) in a convincing way – constitutes the essence of the research 
design. Let us use an analogy to understand the term ‘research design’. While 
constructing a building, the first decision to be arrived at is: whether we need a 
high rise office building, a factory, a school or a residential apartment etc.? 
Until this is decided, we cannot sketch a plan and order material or setting 
critical dates for completion of the project dates. Similarly, a social researcher 
needs to be clear about the research questions and then the research design will 
flow from the research questions. The function of a research design is to ensure 
that the evidence obtained enables us to answer the initial research questions as 
unambiguously as possible. Obtaining relevant evidence entails specifying the 
type of evidence we need to answer the research question, to test a theory, to 
evaluate a programme or to accurately describe some phenomenon. The issues 
of sampling, method of data collection (e.g. questionnaire, observation, 
document analysis), design of questionnaire etc. are all subsidiary to what 
constitute the evidences that need to collect to answer the research questions. 
Thus the research design ‘deals with a logical problem and not a logistical 
problem. Apart from specifying the logical structure of the data, it also aims to 
test and eliminate alternative explanation of results. 
 
  


--- Page 9 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
10 
The research design comprises of the following components: 
i) the sampling design; (the type of sampling method i.e. random or non 
random sampling); 
ii) the statistical design (i.e. the sample size and the method to draw the 
sampling to be adopted); 
iii) the observational design (i.e. the instrument of collection of data); 
iv) the operational design i.e. the specific details by which the procedure in 
(i), (ii) & (iii) above are to be carried out. 
6.4 RESEARCH DESIGN VS. RESEARCH 
METHODS 
Research design is different from the research methods. The research methods 
are made of data collection and techniques of data analysis whereas the 
research design is a logical structure of an enquiry. There is nothing intransic 
about any research design that requires a particular method of data collection. 
How the data are collected is irrelevant to the logic of the research design. 
Confusing research designs with research methods leads to poor evaluation of 
designs. For example equating cross sectional designs with questionnaires or 
case studies with participant observation result in evaluation of research 
designs against the strengths and weakness of the method rather than their 
ability to draw relatively unambiguous conclusion or to select between rival 
plausible hypothesis. 
6.5 RESEARCH METHODS 
Research methods as explained in Unit 1 refers to tools and techniques of data 
collection and data analysis. Broadly Research Methods are put under two 
categories: (i) Mono Methods, (ii) Mixed Methods. Within mono methods, 
there are two approaches (i) quantitative (QN) methods (ii) qualitative (QL) 
methods. Since quantitative methods are associated with positivist and post-
positivist paradigm, quantitative method is also termed as (QN) method 
research. Similarly by virtue of the fact that QL methods are associated with 
interpretativist paradigm and critical theory paradigm, research conducted by 
the qualitative method is also termed as qualitative methods research. 
Research Methods 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
  
Mono-Methods Mixed Methods of 
Quantitative and 
Qualitative Methods 
Quantitative 
Methods 
Qualitative 
Methods 


--- Page 10 ---
 
 
11
Research Design and 
Mixed Methods 
Research
6.5.1 Quantitative Methods 
The researcher using this approach tests theory through empirical observations 
and inclines to establish cause and effect relationship. Well predesigned 
structured questionnaire and structured interviews are resorted as tool to collect 
the data. The variables that can be measured are emphasized. The descriptive, 
analytical and inferential statistical techniques are used to analyse the data. 
Experimental research design is used to make the logical structure of the 
research study. Generalization of laws and their replication is emphasized. 
6.5.2  Qualitative Methods 
Under qualitative approach, a researcher starts with observation as a basis for 
generating theory and concentrates on meaning of observations. He studies 
events as they occur in naturalistic settings. He allows interview topics to 
emerge during conversation and listens to others’ interpretation and 
perspectives. 
Under qualitative method, open-end questionnaire, key informants, group 
discussion and unstructured interviews, documents, interview transcripts etc. 
are used as tools to collect data. Content analysis, Case study, Action research 
participatory method, Cluster analysis, Factor analysis, Correspondence analysis, 
Context analysis, are used in analyzing qualitative data. You will find details of 
these techniques in Unit 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17 of Block 4 and 18, 19 and 20 of 
Block 5 of this course. 
6.5.3 Mixed Methods 
The combination of at least one qualitative and at least one quantitative 
component related to measurement scale, tools of data collection or data 
analysis technique in a single research study/project is known as mixed 
methods research. For example it can be in the following forms: 
• Employment of more than one measurement procedure in different kind of 
situations such as different ways of measuring levels of job satisfaction. 
• Employment of two or more methods of data collection. For example we 
may employ observation, interview and questionnaire to collect the data 
about decent work. 
• Employment of two or more data analysis techniques for example, content 
analysis and factor analysis.  
M
ixed methods research has gained a tremendous popularity in social, 
behavioural and related sciences in recent years. The rationale for mixed 
method design research is to take the best of qualitative (QL) and quantitative 
methods (QN) and combine them. However, many debates on mixed method 
research design are based on methodological arguments due to the ways QN 
method is linked to positivist paradigm and QL method to Interpretative and 
critical theory paradigm. 
As discussed above, keeping in view the diametrical oppositional attributes of 
QL and QN methods, one may argue that these methods are not compatible to 
each other and in such a situation how a truce between two kinds of approaches 
be useful to conduct the meaningful research? 
Notwithstanding the philosophical debate between QN and QL approach. 
Mixed methods research designs are justified primarily by exploiting the 
