--- Page 22 ---
 
 
23
Research Design and 
Mixed Methods 
Research
input design and core qualitative methods as  core design (quan-QUAL), (ii) 
supplementary quantitative methods design as follow up to core quantitative 
methods design (QUAL-quan), (iii) preliminary qualitative methods input 
design and core quantitative methods design (qual-QUAN), (iv) supplementary 
qualitative methods design as follow up to quantitative methods design 
(QUAN-qual). 
6.10  SOME USEFUL BOOKS 
Bergman Manfred Max (2008): The Strawmen of Qualitative-Quantitative 
Divide and Their Influence on Mixed Method Research in Advances in Mixed 
Methods Research, edited by Manfred Max Bergman, Sage Publications Ltd. 
London. 
Creswell John W, Clark Kicki L Plano and Amanda L. Garrett (2008): 
Methodological Issues in Conducting Mixed Methods Research Designs in 
Advances in Mixed Methods Research, Sage Publications Ltd. London. 
Tashakkori Abbas and Teddlie Charles (2008): Quality of inferences in Mixed 
Methods Research in Advances in Mixed Methods Research, Sage Publications 
Ltd. London. 
Morgan David L (2014): Integrating Qualitative and Quantitative Methods- A 
Pragmatic Approach, Sage Publications, London, N. Delhi, Singapore. 
6.11 ANSWERS OF HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) A variable expressed in terms of numerals like 1, 2, 3,.. etc. is called 
quantitative variable. For instance, yield of an agricultural output, 
height/weight of individuals, etc. can be measured and expressed in 
quantitative terms. On the other hand, a variable expressed in terms of the 
choices or opinion about attributes/ characteristics like one’s feelings or 
opinion is called qualitative variable. 
2) See Sub-section 6.2.1 
3) See Sub-section 6.2.3 
4) Descriptive research describes a situation, a phenomenon or event or a 
social system. It aims to describe the state of affairs as it exists. On the 
other hand, explanatory results aim to establish cause and effect 
relationship. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) Research questions guide the research design. 
2) There are two major functions of the research design: (i) to determine the 
type of evidences (data/information) which are needed to answer the 
research questions, (ii) to eliminate the alternative explanation of the 
results. 
 


--- Page 23 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
24 
3) If a research study is confined to use either quantitative or qualitative 
method, it is said to be a mono method research. The combination of at 
least one quantitative and at least one qualitative component in a single 
research project is known as mixed methods research. 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) See Section 6.6 
2) See Section 6.7 
3) See Section 6.7 


--- Page 24 ---
 
 
25 
Data Collection and 
Sampling Design UNIT 7 DATA COLLECTION AND 
SAMPLING DESIGN  
Structure 
7.0 Objectives  
7.1 Introduction 
7.2 An Overview of the Unit 
7.3 Method of Data Collection 
7.4 Tools of Data Collection 
7.5 Sampling Design 
7.5.1 Population and Sample Aggregates and Inference 
7.5.2 Non-Random Sampling 
7.5.3 Random or Probability Sampling 
7.5.4 Methods of Random Sampling 
7.5.4.1 Simple Random Sampling with Replacement (SRSWR) 
7.5.4.2 Simple Random Sampling without Replacement (SRSWR) 
7.5.4.3 Interpenetrating Sub-Samples (I-PSS) 
7.5.4.4 Systematic Sampling  
7.5.4.5 Sampling with Probability Proportional to Size (PPS) 
7.5.4.6 Stratified Sampling 
7.5.4.7 Cluster Sampling 
7.5.4.8 Multi-Stage Sampling 
7.6 The Choice of an Appropriate Sampling Method 
7.7 Let Us Sum Up 
7.8 Some Useful Books 
7.9 Answers or Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
7.0 OBJECTIVES 
After going through this Unit, you will be able to: 
• appreciate different methods of collecting data; 
• acquire knowledge of different tools of data collection; 
• define the key terms commonly used in quantitative analysis, like 
parameter, statistic, estimator, estimate, inference, standard error, 
confidence intervals, etc.; 
• distinguish between random and non-random sampling procedures for data 
collection;  
• appreciate the advantages of random sampling in  the assessment of the 
“precision” of the estimates of population parameters; 
• acquire knowledge of the procedure for drawing samples by different 
methods;  
 


--- Page 25 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
26 
• develop the ability to obtain estimates of key parameters like population 
and sample aggregates, proportion, mean, etc.; and of the “precision” of 
such estimates under different sampling methods; and  
• appreciate the feasibility/appropriateness of applying different sampling 
methods in different research contexts.   
7.1 INTRODUCTION 
Studies of the behaviour of variables and of relationships amongst them 
necessitate measurement of the variables involved. Variables can be 
quantitative variables like GNP or qualitative variables  like opinions of 
individuals on, say, ban on smoking in public places. The former set assumes 
quantitative values. The latter set does not admit of easy quantification, though 
some of these can be categorised into groups that can then be assigned 
quantitative values. Research strategies thus adopt two approaches, quantitative 
and qualitative. We shall deal with the quantitative approach in this unit. The 
various measurement scales and scaling techniques to measure the qualitative 
data will be discussed in Unit 8. 
The basic ingredient of quantitative research is the measurement in quantitative 
terms of the variables involved or the collection of the data relevant for the 
analytical and interpretative processes that constitute research. The quality of 
the data utilised in research is important because the use of faulty data in such 
endeavour results in misleading conclusions, however sophisticated may be the 
analytical tools used for analysis. Research processes, be it testing of 
hypotheses and models or providing the theoretical basis for policy or review 
of policy, call for objectivity, integrity and analytical rigour in order to ensure 
academic and professional acceptability and, above all, an effective tool to 
tackle the problem at hand. Data used for research should, therefore, reflect, as 
accurately as possible, the phenomena these seek to measure and be free from 
errors, bias and subjectivity. Collection of data has thus to be made on a 
scientific basis.    
7.2 AN OVERVIEW OF THE UNIT 
How to assemble data on a scientific basis? There are broadly three different 
methods of collecting data. These are dealt with in section 7.3. The tools that 
one can use for collecting data – the formats and the devices that modern 
technology has provided – are enumerated in section 7.4. There are situations 
where it is considered desirable to gather data from only a part of the universe, 
or a sample selected from the universe of interest to the study at hand, rather 
than a complete coverage of the universe, for reasons of cost, convenience, 
expediency, speed and effort. Questions then arise as to the manner in which 
such a sample should be chosen – the sampling design. This question is 
examined in detail in section 7.5. The discussion is divided into a number of 
sub-topics. Concepts relating to population aggregates like mean and variance 
and similar aggregates from the sample and the use of the latter as estimates of 
population aggregates have been introduced in sub-section 7.5.1. There are two 
types of sampling: random and non random. Non random sampling methods 
and the contexts in which these are used are described in sub-section 7.5.2. A 
random sample has certain advantages over a non random sample — it 
provides a basis for drawing valid conclusions from the sample about the 
parent population. It enables us to state the precision of the estimates of 


--- Page 26 ---
 
 
27 
Data Collection and 
Sampling Design 
population parameters in terms of (a) the extent of their variation or (b) an 
interval within which the value of the population parameter is likely to lie with 
a given degree of certainty. Further, it even helps the researcher to determine 
the size of the sample to be drawn if his project is subject to a sanctioned 
budget and permissible limits of error in the estimate of the population 
parameter. These principles are explained in sub-section 7.5.3. Eight methods 
of random sampling are then detailed in sub-section 7.5.4. These details relate 
to (i) operational procedures for drawing samples, and (ii) expressions for (a) 
estimators of parameters and measures of their variation and b) estimators of 
such variation where the population variation parameter is not known. Different 
sampling procedures are also compared, as we go along, in terms of the relative 
precision of the estimates, they generate. Finally, the question of choosing the 
sampling method that is appropriate to a given research context is addressed in 
section 7.6. A short summing up of the Unit is given in section 7.7.  
7.3 METHOD OF DATA COLLECTION  
There are three methods of data collection – the Census and Survey Method, 
the Observation Method and the Experimental Method.  The first is a carefully 
planned and organised study or enquiry to collect data on the subject of the 
study/enquiry. We might for instance organise a study on the prevalence of the 
smoking habit among high school children – those aged 14 to 17 - in a certain 
city. One approach is to collect data of the kind we wish to collect on the 
subject matter of the study from all such children in all the schools in the city. 
In other words, we have a complete enumeration or census of the population 
or universe relevant to the enquiry, namely, the city’s high school children 
(called the respondent units or informants  of the Study) to collect the data we 
desire. The other is to confine our attention to a suitably selected part of the 
population of high school children of the city, or a sample, for gathering the 
data needed. We are then conducting a sample survey. A well known example 
of Census enquiry is the Census of Population  conducted in the year  2011,  
where data on the demographic, economic, social and cultural characteristics of 
all persons residing in India were collected. Among sample surveys of note 
are the household surveys conducted by the National Sample Survey 
Organisation (NSSO) of the Government of India that collect data on the socio-
economic characteristics of a sample of households spread across the country. 
The Observation Method records data as things occur, making use of an 
appropriate and accepted method of measurement. An example is to record the 
body temperature of a patient every hour or a patient’s blood pressure, pulse 
rate, blood sugar levels or the lipid profile at specified intervals. Other examples 
are the daily recording of a location’s maximum and minimum temperatures, 
rainfall during the South West / North East monsoon every year in an area, etc.  
The Experimental Method collects data through well designed and controlled 
statistical experiments. Suppose for example, we wish to know the rate at 
which manure is to be applied to crops to maximise yield. This calls for an 
experiment, in which all variables other than manure that affect yield, like 
water, quality of soil, quality of seed, use of insecticides and so on, need to be 
controlled so as to evaluate the effect of different levels of manure on the yield. 
Other methods of conducting the experiment to achieve the same objective 
without controlling “all other factors” also exist. Two branches of statistics – 
The Design and Analysis of Experiments and Analysis of Variance — deal 
with these.  


--- Page 27 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
28 
7.4 TOOLS OF DATA COLLECTION 
How do we collect data? We translate the data requirements of the proposed 
Study into items of information to be collected from the respondent units to be 
covered by the study and organise the items into a logical format. Such a 
format, setting out the items of information to be collected from the respondent 
units, is called the questionnaire or schedule of the study. The questionnaire 
has a set of pre-specified questions and the replies to these are recorded either 
by the respondents themselves or by the investigators. The questionnaire 
approach assumes that the respondent is capable of understanding and 
answering the questions all by himself/herself, as the investigator is not 
supposed, in this approach, to influence the response in any manner by 
interpreting the terms used in the questions. Respondent-bias will have to be 
minimised by keeping the questions simple and direct. Often the responses are 
sought in the form of “yes”, “no” or “can’t say” or the judgment of the 
respondent with reference to the perceived quality of a service is graded, like, 
“good”, “satisfactory” or “unsatisfactory”.  
In the schedule approach on the other hand, the questions are detailed. The 
exact form of the question to be asked of the respondent is not given to the 
respondent and the task of asking and eliciting the information required in the 
schedule is left to the investigator. Backed by his training and the instructions 
given to him, the investigator uses his ingenuity in explaining the concepts and 
definitions to respondents to obtain reliable information. This does not mean 
that investigator-bias is more in the schedule approach than in the questionnaire 
approach. Intensive training of investigators is necessary to ensure that such a 
bias does not affect the responses from respondents.  
Schedules and questionnaires are used for collecting data in a number of ways. 
Data may be collected by personally contacting the respondents of the survey. 
Interviews can also be conducted over the telephone and the responses of the 
respondent recorded by the investigator. The advent of modern electronic and 
telecommunications technology enables interviews being done through e-mails 
or by ‘chatting’ over the internet. The mail method is one where (usually) 
questionnaires are mailed to the respondents of the survey and replies received 
by mail through (postage pre-paid) business-reply envelopes. The respondents 
can also be asked (usually by radio or television channels or even print media) 
to send their replies by SMS to a mobile telephone number or to an e-mail 
address.     
Collection of data can also be done through mechanical, electro-mechanical or 
electronic devices. Data on arrival and departure times of workers are obtained 
through a mechanical device. The time taken by a product to roll off the 
assembly line and the time taken by it to pass through different work stations 
are recorded by timers. A large number of instruments are used for collecting 
data on weather conditions by meteorological centres across the country that 
help assessing current and emerging weather conditions. Electronic Data 
Transfers (EDT) can also be the means through which source agencies like 
ports and customs houses, where export and import data originate, supply data 
to a central agency like the Directorate General of Commercial Intelligence and 
Statistics (DGCI&S) for consolidation.    
The above methods enable us to collect primary data, that is, data being 
collected afresh by the agency conducting the enquiry or study.  . The agency 


--- Page 28 ---
 
 
29 
Data Collection and 
Sampling Design 
concerned can also make use of data on the subject already collected by 
another agency or other agencies – secondary data.  Secondary data are 
published by several agencies, mostly Government agencies, at regular 
intervals. These can be collected from the publications / compact discs or the 
websites of the agencies concerned. But such data have to be examined 
carefully to see whether these are suitable or not for the study at hand before 
deciding to collect new data.  
Errors in data constitute an important area of concern to data users. Errors can 
arise due to confining data collection to a sample. ( sampling errors). It can be 
due to faulty measurement arising out of lack of clarity about what is to be 
measured and how it is measured. Even when these are clear, errors can creep 
in due to inaccurate measurement. Investigator bias also leads to errors in data. 
Failure to collect data from respondent units of the population or the sample 
due to omission by the investigator or due to non-response (respondents not 
furnishing the required information) also results in errors. ( non-sampling 
errors). The total survey error made up of these two types of errors need to be 
minimised to ensure quality of data.     
7.5 SAMPLING DESIGN 
We have looked at methods and tools of data collection, chief among which is 
the sample survey. How to select a sample for the survey to be conducted? 
There are a number of methods of choosing a sample from a universe. These 
consist of two categories, random sampling and non-random sampling. Let us 
turn these methods and see how well the results from the sample can be utilised 
to draw conclusions about the parent universe.  
But first let us turn to some notations, concepts and definitions.  
7.5.1 Population and Sample Aggregates and Inference   
Let us denote population characteristics by upper case (capital) letters in 
English or Greek and sample characteristics by lower case (small) letters in 
English. Let us consider a (finite) population consisting of N units U i (i = 
1,2,….N). Let Yi (i = 1,2,….N) be the value of the variable y, the characteristic 
under study, for the ith unit Ui (i = 1,2,…..N). For instance, the units may be the 
students of a university and y may be their weight in kilograms.  Any function 
of the population values Yi is called a parameter. An example is the population 
mean ‘µ ’ or ‘M’ given by (1/N) iYi, where  i stands for summation over i = 1 
to N. Let us now draw a sample of ‘n’ units u i (i = 1,2,…..n) 1  from the above 
population and let the value of the i th sample unit be y i (i = 1,2,…..n) 2. In other 
words, yi (i = 1,2,….n) are the sample observations. A function of the sample 
observations is referred to as a statistic. The sample mean ‘m’ given by 
(1/n) iyi ,   i  (i =1 to n), is an example of a statistic. 
Let us note the formulae for some important parameters and statistics.  
Population total Y =  iYi,  i stands for summation over i = 1 to N             (2.1)  
Population mean  = ‘µ ’ or ‘M’ , = (1/N) iYi,   i , i = 1 to N                        (2.2) 
                                                            
 
1 The sample units are being referred to as ui (i = 1,2,…..n) and not in terms of Ui  as we do not 
know which of the population units have got included in the sample. Each ui in the sample is 
some population unit     
2 The same reasons apply for referring the sample values or observations as yi (i = 1,2,…n) and 
not in terms of the population values Yi . yi  wil be some Yi.       


--- Page 29 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
30 
Population variance σ2 = (1/N)  iYi
2 – M2 ,    i , i = 1 to N                          (2.3) 
Population SD = σ = +√[(1/N)  iYi
2 – M2] ,   i , i = 1 to N                         (2.4)  
Sample mean = (1/n)  iyi ,  i , (i =1 to n)      (2.5)  
Sample variance s2 =  (1/n)  i yi 
2 – m2 ,      i i = 1 to n     (2.6)  
                               = [ss]2 /n ,  where [ss]2 =  (yi – m)2 =   yi 
2 – n m2 =  
sum of squares of sample observations from their mean ‘m’             (2.7) 
Sample standard deviation ‘s’ = +√[(1/n) i yi 
2 – m2 ],   i ,  i = 1 to n         (2.8) 
Population proportion P = (1/N) iYi = Nı / N, (where Nı is the number  
of units in the population possessing a specified characteristic)                   (2.9) 
σ2 = (1/N)  i Yi
2 – M2  = P – P2 = P(1 – P) = PQ,  
where Q = [(N – Nı)/N] = (1 – P).                                      (2.10)
                                                                                                                    
m = p, (proportion of units in the sample with the specific characteristic) (2.11)  
s2 =  p(1 – p) = pq, where p is the sample proportion and p + q = 1            (2.12) 
[ss]2 = npq                    (2.13) 
The purpose of drawing a sample from a population is to arrive at some 
conclusions about the parent population from the results of the sample. This 
process of drawing conclusions or making inferences about the population 
from the information contained in a sample chosen from the population is 
called inference. Let us see how this process works and what its components 
are. The sample mean ‘m’, for example, can serve as an estimate of the value 
of the population mean ‘ µ ’. The statistic ‘m’ is called an estimator (point 
estimator) of the population mean ‘ µ ’. The value of ‘m’ calculated from a 
specific sample is called an estimate (point estimate) of the population mean 
‘µ ’. In general, a function of sample observations, that is, a statistic, which can 
be used to estimate the unknown value of a population parameter, is an  
estimator of the population parameter. The value of the estimator calculated 
from a specific sample is an estimate of the population parameter.  
The estimate ‘m 1’ of the population parameter ‘ µ ’, computed from a sample, 
will most likely be different from ‘µ ’. There is thus an error in using ‘m1’ as an 
estimate of ‘µ ’. This error is the sampling error, assuming that all measurement 
errors, biases etc., are absent, that is,  there are no non-sampling errors .  Let us 
draw another sample from the population and compute the estimate ‘m2‘ of ‘µ ’.  
‘m2‘ may be different from ‘m 1’ and also from ‘ µ ’. Supposing we generate in 
this manner a number of estimates m i (i = 1,2,3,…….) of ‘ µ ’ by drawing 
repeated samples from the population. All these m i (i = 1,2,3,….) would be 
different from each other and from ‘ µ ’. What is the extent of the variability in 
the m i (i = 1,2,3,….), or, the variability of the error in the estimate of ‘ µ ’ 
computed from different samples? How will these values be spread or scattered 
around the value of ‘µ ’ or the errors be scattered around zero? What can we say 
about the estimate of the parameter obtained from the specific sample that we 
have drawn from the population as a means of measuring the parameter, 
without actually drawing repeated samples? How well do non-random and 
random samples answer these questions? The answers to these questions are 
important from the point of view of inference.      


--- Page 30 ---
 
 
31 
Data Collection and 
Sampling Design 
Let us first look at the different methods of non-random sampling and then 
move on to random sampling. 
7.5.2 Non-Random Sampling 
There are several kinds of non-random sampling. A judgment sample  is a 
sample that has been selected by making use of one’s expert knowledge of the 
population or the universe under consideration. It can be useful in some 
circumstances. An auditor for example could decide, on the basis of his 
experience, on what kind of transactions of an institution he would examine so 
as to draw conclusions about the quality of financial management of an 
institution. Convenience Sampling is used in exploratory research to get a 
broad idea of the characteristic under investigation. An example is one that 
consists of some of those coming out of a movie theatre; and these persons may 
be asked to give their opinion of the movie they had just seen. Another 
example is one consisting of those passers by in a shopping mall whom the 
investigator is able to meet. They may be asked to give their opinion on a 
certain television programme. The point here is the convenience of the 
researcher in choosing the sample. Purposive Sampling is much similar to 
judgement sampling and is also made use of in preliminary research. Such a 
sample is one that is made up of a group of people specially picked up for a 
given purpose. In Quota Sampling, subgroups or strata of the universe (and 
their shares in the universe) are identified. A convenience  or a judgement 
sample is then selected from each stratum. No effort is made in these types of 
sampling to contact members of the universe who are difficult to reach. In 
Heterogeneity Sampling units are chosen to include all opinions or views. 
Snowball Sampling is used when dealing with a rare characteristic. In such 
cases, contacting respondent units would be difficult and costly. This method 
relies on referrals from initial respondents to generate additional respondents. 
This technique enables one to access social groups that are relatively invisible 
and vulnerable. This method can lower search costs substantially but this 
saving in cost is at the expense of the representative character of the sample. 
An example of this method of sampling is to find a rare genetic trait in a person 
and to start tracing his lineage to understand the origin, inheritance and 
etiology of the disease. 
It would be evident from the description of the methods given above that the 
relationship between the sample and the parent universe not clear. The 
selection of specific units for inclusion in the sample seem to be subjective and 
discretionary in nature and, therefore, may well reflect the researcher’s or the 
investigator’s attitudes and bias with reference to the subject of the enquiry. 
A sample has to be representative of the population from which it has been 
selected, if it is to be useful in arriving at conclusions about the parent 
population. A representative sample  is one that contains the relevant 
characteristics of the population in the same proportion as in the population.  
Seen from this angle, the non-random sampling methods described above do 
not yield representative samples. Such samples are, therefore, not helpful in 
drawing valid conclusions about the parent population and the way these 
conclusions change when another sample is chosen from the population. Non-
random sampling is, however, useful in certain circumstances. For instance, it 
is an inexpensive and quick way to get a preliminary idea of the variable under 
study or a rough preliminary estimate of the characteristics of the universe that 
helps us to design a scientific enquiry into the problem later. It is thus useful in 
exploratory research.  


--- Page 31 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
32 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) Name the three methods of the data collection 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
2) What is meant by a ‘parameter’? Defining the term ‘statistic’, indicate the 
expressions for population/sample mean and population/sample mean and 
population/sample variance. 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
3) Mention the most important purpose of studying the population on the basis 
of a sample. In this context, define the terms ‘estimator’ and ‘estimate’ with 
a suitable example. 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
4) Defining the term ‘representative sample’. Indicate how is ‘random 
sampling’ principally different from that of ‘non-random sampling’? What 
could be the use of the latter despite its major drawback vis-à-vis the 
former? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
7.5.3 Random or Probability Sampling 
Random sampling methods, on the other hand, yield samples that are 
representative of the parent universe. The selection process in random sampling 
is free form the bias of the individuals involved in drawing the sample as the 
units of the population are selected at random for inclusion in the sample. 
Random sampling is a method of sampling in which each unit in the population 
has a predetermined chance (probability) of being included in the sample. A 
sampling design is a clear specification of all possible samples of a given type 
with their corresponding probabilities. This property of random sampling helps 
us to answer the questions we raised at the end of sub-section 2.6.1 above. That 
is, we can make estimates of the characteristics of the parent population from 
the results of a sample and also indicate the extent of error to which such 
estimates are subject or the precision of the estimate . This is better than not 
knowing anything at all about the magnitude of the error in our statements 
regarding the parent population. Let us see how random sampling helps in this 
regard. 
