--- Page 42 ---
 
 
43 
Data Collection and 
Sampling Design 
A sample of n ( > 1) units with pps can be drawn with or without replacement. 
Let us consider a pps-wr sample. Let {y i , p i} be respectively the sample 
observation on the selected unit and the initial probability of selection at the i–
th draw, i = 1,2,----n. Each (y i / pi) , i = 1,2,----- n in the sample is an unbiased 
estimate [Yi(pps-wr)*] of the population total Y and V(Y i(pps-wr)*) =  i (Yr 
2 /Pr) – 
Y2,  r , r  = 1 to n. (see 2.60). Estimates from pps-wr samples are: 
Y*pps-wr = (1/n)  i (yi / pi) = (1/n)  i Y*(i)pps-wr ;  i  ,  i = 1 to n.                 (2.62) 
V(Y*pps-wr ) = (1/n)[  r (Yr 
2 /Pr) – Y2] ;  r , r = 1 to N.                              (2.63) 
V(mpps-wr ) = (1/N2 )(1/n)[  r (Yr 
2 /Pr) – Y2] ;   r , r = 1 to N.                    (2.64) 
v (Y*pps-wr )= [1/{n(n – 1)}][ r (yr
2
 / pr
2 –  nY*2];  r , r = 1 to n;  
 (using 2.51)                   (2.65)  
Operational procedure for drawing a pps-wr sample: The steps are:  
 1) Cumulate the sizes of the units to arrive at the cumulative totals of the 
unit sizes. Thus  
Ti - 1 = X1 + X2 + -----+ Xi –1  ; Ti = X1 + X2 +---+ Xi - 1 + Xi = Ti - 1 + Xi ;  
i = 1, 2,……..., N. 
 2)  Then choose a random number R between 1 and T N = X 1 + X 2 
+………..+ XN = X . 
 3) Choose the unit U i if R lies between T i - 1 and Ti, that is, if Ti - 1 < R ≤ Ti . 
The probability P(U i) of selecting the i-th unit will thus be P(U i) =  (T i - 
Ti – 1) /TN = Xi / X = Pi  
4)  Repeat the operation ‘n’ times for selecting a sample of size n with pps-wr. 
7.5.5.6  Stratified Sampling 
The Method: We might sometimes find it useful to classify the universe into a 
number of groups and treat each of these groups as a separate universe for 
purposes of sampling. Each of these groups is called a stratum and the process 
of grouping stratification. Estimates obtained from each stratum can then be 
combined to arrive at estimates for the entire universe. This method is very 
useful as (i) it gives estimates not only for the whole universe but also for the 
sub-universes and (ii) it affords the choice of different sampling methods for 
different strata as appropriate. It is particularly useful when a survey organistion has 
regional field offices. This method is called Stratified Sampling.  
Let us divide the population (universe) of N units into k strata. Let N s be the 
number of units in the s-th stratum. Y si be the value of the i-th unit in the s-th 
stratum. Let the population mean of the s-th stratum be M s. M s = (1/N s) Ysi, 
 i, i = 1,2,----,N s (that is over the units within the s-th stratum) and the 
population M is =(1/N) sNs Ms =  sWs Ms , where W s = (Ns / N) and  s being 
over the strata s = 1,2,……,k). Suppose that we select random samples from 
each stratum and the sampling method for different strata are different. Let the 
unbiased estimate of the population mean M s of the s-th stratum be m s. 
Denoting ‘st’ for stratified sampling, an unbiased estimator of M is given by  
mst = s Ws ms  = (1/N)  s Ns ms,     s , s = 1 to k.                                      (2.66) 
V(mst) =  sWs
2 V(ms) = (1/N2 ) s Ns
2 V(ms),   s , s= 1 to k                   (2.67) 


--- Page 43 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
44 
Cov.(ms,mr) = 0 for s ⋅≠ r ; (samples from diff. strata are independently  
chosen) ..                   (2.68) 
Yst* =  sYs* ;  s , s = 1 to k.                                                                       (2.69)  
V(Yst*) =  sV(Ys*),  s , s = 1 to k.                                                              (2.70) 
Thus estimators with smaller variance (efficient estimators) can be obtained in 
stratified sampling if we form the strata in such a way as to minimise intra-
strata or within-strata variation, that is, variance within strata. This would 
mean maximising between-strata or inter-strata variation, since the total 
variation is made up of within-strata and between-strata variation. In other 
words, units in a stratum should be homogeneous. 
Stratified sampling enables us to choose the sample we wish to select by 
drawing independent samples from each of the different strata in to which we 
have grouped the universe. How do we allocate the total sample size ‘n’ among 
the different strata? One way is to allocate the sample size to different strata in 
proportion to the size of individual strata measured by the number of units in 
these strata, namely, N s, [  s N s = N, (s= 1 to k)]. This method is especially 
appropriate in situations where no information is available except the sizes of 
the strata. The sample sizes for the samples from the stratum, say, the s-th 
stratum, would then be ns = n(Ns/N) and  s ns can easily seen to be equal to ‘n’. 
There are other methods like allocation of the sample size among strata in 
proportion to the stratum totals of the variable under study, that is, Y s , the 
stratum total of the s-th stratum, ‘s’ = 1 to k. We shall not go into the details of 
other methods here except one situation, namely, when we have a fixed budget 
F sanctioned for the survey. Let the cost function F be of the form F0 +  nsFs , 
( s , s = 1 to k), where F 0 , n s and F s are respectively the overhead cost, the 
sample size in stratum ‘s’ and the per unit cost of surveying a unit in stratum 
‘s’ (s = 1,2,-----, k). We can determine the optimum stratum-wise-sample-size 
by minimising the sampling variance of the sample mean ( 2.67) subject to the 
constraint that the cost of the survey is fixed.  The stratum-wise optimum 
sample size is given by  
ns = [(F - F0)] [Ws√(Vs / Fs )] / [  s Ws√(VsFs)]   , s = 1, k.                (2.71)   
The stratum sample size should, therefore, be proportional to W s
√(Vs / Fs). The 
minimum variance with the ns so determined is,  
Min. V(mst ) = [ Ws√(VsFs)]2 / (F - F0)]                  (2.72)   
Check Your Progress 4 
1) When is PPS method adopted? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
2) When will the sampling variance of Ypps * be small? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 


--- Page 44 ---
 
 
45 
Data Collection and 
Sampling Design 
3) Say True (T) and False (F): 
a) PPS and stratified sampling can be combined with other sampling 
methods.          (T/F) 
b) V(m st) is reduced by ensuring that units within individual strataare 
heterogeneous.          (T/F) 
c) The size of a stratified sample can be allocated among the strate,  
the size being the number of population units in a stratum.        (T/F) 
4) A systematic sample of size 18 has to be selected from a population of 124. 
What problems do you face in selecting the sample? Is the sample mean the 
unbiased estimator of the population mean M? How do you overcome these 
problems? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
7.5.4.7 Cluster Sampling 
The method: Supposing we are interested in studying certain characteristics of 
individuals in an area. We would naturally select a random sample of 
individuals from all the individuals residing in the area and collect the required 
information from the selected individuals. We might also think of selecting a 
sample of households out of all the households in the area and collect the 
required details from all the individuals in the selected households. The 
households in the area are clusters of individuals and what we have done is to 
select a sample of such clusters and to collect the information needed from all 
the individuals in the selected clusters instead of selecting a random sample of 
individuals from all persons in the area.  What we have done is cluster 
sampling. Cluster Sampling is a process of forming suitable clusters of units 
and surveying all the units in a sample of clusters selected according to an 
appropriate sampling method. The clusters of units are formed by grouping 
neighbouring units or units that can be conveniently surveyed together . 
Sampling methods like srswr, srswor, systematic sampling, pps and stratified 
sampling discussed earlier can be applied to sampling of clusters by treating 
clusters themselves as sampling units. The clusters can all be of equal size or 
varying sizes, that is, the number of units can be the same, or vary from cluster 
to cluster. Clusters can be mutually exclusive, that is, a unit belonging to one 
cluster will not belong to any other cluster. They could also be overlapping. 
Estimates from cluster sampling:  Let us consider a population of NK units 
divided into N mutually exclusive clusters of K units each – a case of clusters 
of equal size. The population mean M and the cluster means are given 
respectively by M = (1/N)  sms,  s being over clusters s = 1 to N and m s =  
(1/K) i Y si,  i being from i = 1 to K within the s-th cluster. Let us draw a 
sample of one cluster by srs. The cluster mean m c-srs (the subscript c-srs 
denotes cluster sampling with srs) is an unbiased estimate of M. The 
sampling variance of the sample cluster mean is  
V(mc-srs) = (1/N)    s (ms – M)2 = σσ σσ b
2 = Variance between clusters;     s ,  
s = 1 to N;                   (2.73) 


--- Page 45 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
46 
Let us compare V(m c-srs) with the sampling variance of the sample mean when 
K units are drawn from NK units by SRSWR method. How does the “sampling 
efficiency” of cluster sampling compare with that of SRSWR?. The sampling 
efficiency of cluster sampling compared to that of SRSWR, Ec/srswr , is defined 
as the ratio of the reciprocals of the sampling variances of the unbiased 
estimators of the population mean obtained from the two sampling methods . 
The sampling variances and sampling efficiency are  
V(msrswr) = (1/K) [(1/NK) s iYsi
2 – M2] = σ2/K                            (2.74)   
σ2 = σw
2 + σb
2 = within-cluster variance + between-cluster variance.         (2.75) 
Ec/srswr > 1  if  σw
2 > (K – 1)σb
2                                                     (2.76) 
Thus, cluster sampling is more efficient than SRSWR if the within-cluster 
variance is larger than (K –1) times the between-cluster variance. Is this likely? 
This is not likely as the between-cluster variance will usually be larger than the 
within-cluster variance due to within-cluster homogeneity. Cluster sampling is 
in general less efficient than sampling of individual units from the point of 
view of sampling variance . Sampling of individuals could provide a better 
cross section of the population than a sample of clusters since units in a cluster 
tend to be similar. 
7.5.4.8 Multi-Stage Sampling 
We noted in the sub-section on cluster sampling that random sampling of units 
directly is more efficient than random sampling of clusters of units. But cluster 
sampling is operationally convenient. How to get over this dilemma? We may 
first select a random sample of clusters of units and thereafter select a random 
sample of individual units from the selected clusters. We are thus selecting a 
sample of units, but from selected clusters of units. What we are attempting is a 
two-stage sampling. This can thus be a compromise between the efficiency of 
direct sampling of units and the relatively less efficient sampling of clusters of 
units. This type of sampling would be more efficient than cluster sampling but 
less efficient than direct sampling of individual units. In the sampling 
procedure now proposed, the clusters of units are the first stage units (fsu) or 
the primary stage units (psu). The individual units constitute the second stage 
units (ssu) or the ultimate stage units (usu).  
This procedure of sampling can also be generalised to multi-stage sampling. 
Take for instance a rural household survey. The fsu’s in such a survey may 
consist of districts, the ssu’s may be the tehsils or taluks chosen from the 
districts selected in the first stage, the third stage units could be the villages 
selected from the tehsils or taluks  selected in the second stage and the fourth 
and the ultimate stage units (usu’s) may be the households selected from the 
villages selected in the third stage. Such multi-stage sampling procedures help 
in utilising such information related to the variable under study as may be 
available in choosing the sampling method appropriate at different stages of 
sampling. In a multi-stage sampling, estimates of parameters are built up stage 
by stage. For instance, in two-stage sampling, estimates of the sample 
aggregates relating to the fsu’s  are built up from the ssu’s using the sampling 
method adopted for selecting the ssu’s. These estimates are then used with the 
sample probabilities of selection of fsu’s to build up estimates of the relevant 
population parameters. 


--- Page 46 ---
 
 
47 
Data Collection and 
Sampling Design 7.6 THE CHOICE OF AN APPROPRIATE 
SAMPLING METHOD   
We have considered a number of random sampling methods in the foregoing 
sub-sections. A natural question that arises now is – which method is to be 
adopted in a given situation? Let us consider this question, although the 
answer to it lies scattered across the foregoing sub-sections. The choice of a 
sampling design depends on considerations like a priori information available 
about the population, the precision of the estimates that a sampling design can 
give, operational convenience and cost considerations. 
1) When we do not have any a priori  information about the nature of the 
population variable under study, SRSWR and SRSWOR would be 
appropriate. Both are operationally simple. However, SRSWOR is to be 
preferred, since V(msrswor) < V(m srswr). This advantage holds only when the 
sampling fraction is not small, or N and n are not large.  
2) Systematic sampling is operationally even simpler than SRSWR and 
SRSWOR, but it should not be used for sampling from populations where 
periodic or cyclic trends/variations exist, though this difficulty can be 
overcome if the period of the cycle is known. V(m sys) can be reduced if the 
units chosen in the sample are as heterogeneous as possible.  But this will 
call for a rearrangement of the population units before sampling.  
3) When additional information is available about the variable ‘y’ under study, 
say, on a variable (size variable) ‘x’ related to ‘y’, the pps method should 
be preferred. The sampling variance of Y* (or m) gets reduced when the 
probability of selection of units P i = ( X i /N) are proportional to Y i , that is, 
the size Xi is proportional to Y i or the variables x and y are linearly related 
to each other and the regression line passes through the origin. In such 
cases pps is more efficient than SRSWR. Further, this method can be 
utilised along with other sampling methods and their relative efficiencies. 
pps is operationally simple. Pps-wor combines the efficiency of SRSWOR 
and the efficiency-enhancing capacity of pps. However, most of the 
procedures of selection available, estimators and their variance for pps-wor 
are complicated and are not commonly used in practice. This is particularly 
so in large-scale sample surveys with a small sampling fraction, as in such 
cases sampling without replacement does not result in much gain in 
efficiency. Hence unless the sample size is small, we should prefer pps-wr. 
4) Stratified sampling comes in handy when we wish to get estimates at the 
level of sub-populations or regions or groups. This method also gives us the 
freedom to choose different sampling methods/designs in different strata as 
appropriate to the group (stratum) of the population and the opportunity to 
utilise available additional information relating to the stratum. The 
sampling variance of estimators can also be brought down by forming the 
strata in such a way as to ensure homogeneity of units within individual 
strata. In fact, the stratum sizes can be so chosen as to minimise the 
variance of estimators, when there is a ceiling on the cost of the survey. 
Stratified sampling with SRS, SRSWOR or pps-wr presents a set of 
efficient sampling designs.  
5) Sometimes, sampling of groups of individual units than direct sampling of 
units might be found to be operationally convenient. Supposing it is easier 
to get a complete frame of clusters of individual units than that of units or, 


--- Page 47 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
48 
only such a frame, and not that of the units, is available. (e.g. households 
are clusters of individuals). In such circumstances, cluster sampling is 
adopted. This is in general less efficient than direct sampling of 
individual units, as clusters usually consist of homogeneous units. A 
compromise between operational convenience and efficiency could be 
made by adopting a two-stage sampling design , by selecting a sample of 
individual units (second stage units) from sampled clusters (the first stage 
units). A multi-stage design would be useful in cases where clusters have to 
be selected at more than one stage of sampling.    
6) Finally, we can use the technique of independent I-PSS in conjunction with 
the chosen sampling design to get at (i) an unbiased estimate of V(m) for 
any sampling design or estimator of V(m), however complicated, (ii) a 
confidence interval for ‘M’ based only on the I-PSS estimates (when the 
population distribution is symmetrical) and (iii) a tool for monitoring the 
quality of work of the field staff and agencies.  
7) SRSWOR, stratified sampling with SRSWOR and, when available 
information permits, pps-wr and stratified sampling with pps-wr, turn out 
to be a set of the more efficient and operationally easy designs to choose 
from. I-PSS can also be used in these designs where possible and 
necessary. 
Check Your Progress 5 
1) We wish to study the wage levels of factory labour. What type of sampling 
method would you adopt for the study and why if (a) just a list of factories 
is available with the Chief Inspector of Factories of different State 
Governments, (b) if the list in (a) above also gives the total number of 
employees in the individual factories at the end of last year and (c) the list 
also indicates both the kind of product manufactured in the factory along 
with the information specified in (b) above. 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
7.7 LET US SUM UP  
There are broadly three methods of collecting data. The array of tools used for 
data collection by such methods has expanded over time with the advent of 
modern technology. Confining data collection efforts to a sample from the 
population of interest to the study inevitably leads to questions like the use of 
random and non-random samples. Judgment sampling, convenience sampling, 
purposive sampling, quota sampling and snowball sampling all belong to the 
latter group. The absence of a clear relationship between a non-random sample 
and the parent universe and the presence of the researcher’s bias in the 
selection of the sample render such samples useless for drawing valid 
conclusions about the parent population. But these methods are inexpensive 
and quick ways of getting a preliminary idea of the universe for use in 
designing a detailed enquiry and in exploratory research. Random samples, on 
the other hand, are free from such drawbacks and have properties that help in 
arriving at valid conclusions about the parent population.   


--- Page 48 ---
 
 
49 
Data Collection and 
Sampling Design 
The simplest of the sampling methods – SRSWR - ensures equal chance of 
selection to every unit of the population and yields a sample in which one or 
more units may occur more than once. ‘m srswr’ is an unbiased estimator of M. 
Its precision as an estimator of M increases as the sample size increases. 
SRSWOR yields a sample of distinct units. ‘m srswor’ is also unbiased for ‘M’. 
SRSWOR is a more efficient than SRSWR as V(m srswor) < V(m srswr). But this 
advantage disappears when the sampling fraction is small (< 0.05). Both 
provide an unbiased estimator of V(m). An operationally convenient procedure 
- interpenetrating sub-samples (I-PSS) – also provides an unbiased estimator 
of V(m) for any sampling design and estimator for V(m), however complicated.  
Systematic sampling is a simple and operationally convenient method used in 
large-scale surveys that requires only a random start and the sampling interval 
k = [N/n] for drawing the sample. A slight variant of ‘m’ is unbiased for ‘M’. 
Circular systematic sampling takes care of problems that arise when N/n is not 
an integer.. An unbiased estimate of V(m) is not possible but this problem can 
be tackled easily. Systematic sampling is not recommended when there is a 
periodic or cyclic variation in the population. This problem too can be 
overcome if the period of the cycle is known. 
An example of methods where the probability of selection varies from unit to 
unit is pps. The “size” could be the value of a variable related to the study 
variable. In pps, each y i / p i , where y i is the value of the study variable 
associated with the selected unit and p i  the probability of selection of the unit, 
is an unbiased estimate (Y*) of the population total Y and [(1/N) Y*] an 
unbiased estimator of M. As V(Y*) is small if the probabilities P i are roughly 
proportional to Y i , pps sampling is more efficient than SRS if the size 
variable x is proportional to y, that is,  x and y are linearly related and the 
regression line passes through the origin. pps sampling can be done  with 
SRSWR, SRSWOR or systematic sampling. In pps-srswr, [(1/n)  i(yi / pi)], ( i 
i = 1 to n), is an unbiased estimator of Y. This being the mean of n independent 
unbiased estimates with the same variance V(Y*), v(Y*) can be derived using 
the I-PSS technique. 
Stratified Sampling is used when (i) estimates are needed for subgroups of a 
universe or (ii) the subgroups could be treated as sub-universes. It gives us the 
freedom to choose the sampling method as appropriate to each stratum. 
Estimates of parameters are available for the sub-universes (strata) and these 
can then be combined over the strata to get estimates for the entire universe. SE 
of estimates based on stratified sampling can be small if we form the strata in 
such a way as to minimise intra-strata variance. Each stratum should thus 
consist of homogeneous units, as far as possible. Stratum-wise sample sizes 
can also so chosen as to minimise the variance of estimators.  
Another operationally convenient sampling method, cluster sampling, is to 
sample groups of units or clusters of units at random and collect data from all 
the units of the selected clusters. For example, the household is a cluster of 
individuals. SRSWR, SRSWOR, pps or systematic sampling can be used for 
sampling clusters. Cluster sampling is, in general, less efficient than direct 
sampling of units from the point of view of sampling variance.  The question 
here is one of striking a balance between operational convenience and cost 
reduction on the one hand and efficiency of the sampling design on the other.  
We could improve the efficiency of cluster sampling by selecting a random 
sample of units from each of the selected clusters - introduce another stage of 


--- Page 49 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
50 
sampling. This is two-stage sampling. This would be more efficient than 
cluster sampling but less efficient than direct sampling of units.  Multi-stage 
sampling can also be done. Such designs are commonly used in large-scale 
surveys as these facilitate the utilisation of information available and the choice 
of appropriate sampling designs at different stages.        
Thus while non-random sampling methods are useful in exploratory research 
and preliminary work on planning of enquiries, random sampling techniques 
lead to valid judgments regarding the universe. Among random sampling 
methods, SRSWOR, stratified sampling with SRSWOR and, when available 
information permits, pps-wr and stratified sampling with pps-wr, turn out to 
be a set of the more efficient and practically useful designs to choose from. I-
PSS can also be used in these designs where possible and necessary.  
7.8 SOME USEFUL BOOKS  & REFERENCES 
Burgess, R.G.(ed) 
(1982) 
:
 Field Research: A Sourcebook and Field 
Manual. (Contemporary Social Research 4), 
George Allen and Unwin, London. 
Des Raj & Chandok 
P(1998)  
:
 Sampling Theory, Narosa Publishing House, 
New Delhi. 
Levin, Richard I. & 
Rubin, David S. (1991) 
:
 Statistics for Mangement, Fifth Edition, 
Prentice-Hall of India (Private) Limited, M-97 
Connaught Circus, New Delhi – 110001. 
Krishniah, P.R. & Rao, 
C.R. (Eds.) (1988) 
:
 Handbook of Statistics – Vol. 6 : Sampling, 
North Holland, Amsterdam. 
Mukhopadhyay, 
Parimal (1998) 
:
 Theory & Methods of Survey Sampling, 
Prentice-Hall of India Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi. 
Murthy, M.N.  (1967) :
 Sampling Theory and Methods, Statistical 
Publishing Society, 204, Barrackpore Trunk 
Road, Kolkota-700108. 
Rao, C.R., Mitra, S.K. 
and Matthai, A.  (1966) 
:
 Formulae and Tables for Statistical Work, 
Statistical Publishing Society, Kolkota – 
700108. 
Sampath, S. (2005) :
 Sampling Theory & Methods, Second Edition, 
Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi, Chennai, 
Mumbai, Kolkata. 
Singh, Kultar (2007) :  Quantitative Social Research Methods, Sage 
Publications (Pvt.) Limited, New Delhi 
Singleton Jr., Royce A. 
& Straits, Bruce C. 
(2005) 
:
 Approaches to Social Research, 4 th Edition, 
Oxford University Press, New York – Oxford. 
Viswanathan, P.K.    
(2007) 
: Business Statistics – An Applied Orientation, 
Darling Kindersely (India) Pvt. Ltd. – licensees 
of Pearson Education in South Asia. 


--- Page 50 ---
 
 
51 
Data Collection and 
Sampling Design 7.9 ANSWERS OR HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES 
Check Your Progress 1 
1)  Three methods of data collection are: the census and survey method, the 
observation method, and the experimental method. 
2)  A function of population values is a parameter; a function of sample 
observations is a statistic. 
2 2 2 2 2 21 1 1 1,  ,  ,  and i i i iM Y m y Y M s y mN N N Ns= = = - = -å å å å , 
where M/m is the mean of the population/sample values are the 
expressions of population/sample means and population/sample variance. 
3)  The purpose of drawing/studying a sample is to arrive at inferences about 
the characteristics of the unknown population.  Thus, the sample mean is 
an estimator of the population mean (of the variable under study). The actual 
value of the estimator when computed from a sample is the estimate.   
4)  A representative sample is one that possesses the characteristics of the 
population in the same proportion as in the population. A conscious or 
subjective selection of units introduces a bias that erodes the sample’s 
capacity to be a true representative of the characteristics of the population. 
It is for this reason that a random sampling procedure is preferred.  Although 
non-random sampling is drawn without any regard to the rigors of a random 
sampling procedure, it gives a rough idea of the unknown features of the 
population under focus. Implemented judiciously, it can serve the objectives 
of providing preliminary inputs for planning a detailed enquiry later.   
Check Your Progress 2 
1) Sample observations in a random sample are random variables. A statistic 
is a function of sample observations and is, therefore, also a random 
variable. This random variable assumes different values in repeated 
random samples. These values form a frequency distribution of the 
statistic. This frequency distribution will, in the limit, tend to a probability 
distribution that gives the probabilities of the statistic assuming different 
values. This probability distribution is called the sampling distribution of 
the statistic. Let a statistic ‘t’ be an estimator of a population parameter, 
say, T. The estimator ‘t’ is an unbiased estimator of the parameter ‘T’, if 
the mean of the sampling distribution of ‘t’ is ‘T’. Since the mean of the 
sampling distribution of ‘t’ can also be denoted by E(t), we can express 
this condition as E(t) = T.  
2) Let ‘t’ be an estimator of ‘T’. The sampling distribution of the statistic ‘t’ 
can be derived only if the statistic is based on a random sample selected 
from the population with a parameter ‘T’. The mean of the sampling 
distribution can then be derived from the sampling distribution of ‘t’. That 
is, E(t) can be derived. If E(t) is ≠ T and E(t) = KT or T+K, we can correct 
the estimator ‘t’ as (t/K) or (t – K) to arrive at an unbiased estimator of T. 
An example is the unbiased estimator of σ2. 
3) See Sub-section 7.5.3 A  


--- Page 51 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
52 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) The answer for (i) would be 4.41 2.1 0.52516 4= = . The answer for (ii) is 
4.41 2.1 0.4225 5= = . The percentage decrease in SE works out to [(0.525 
– 0.42)x 100] / [0.525] = 20%. The percentage increase in the sample size 
is 9 100 56.25%*16= = . The extent of increase is larger than the extent of 
decrease in the standard error. Try to work out (iii) and the compare the 
results of (ii) & (iii). 
2) Use the formula 2.39 for variance of the sample mean under SRSWOR. 
Note that, for the same sample size, 
1( ) ( ) 1 ( ). 1 1
srswor srswr srswr
N n nV m V m V mN N
− −− = −− −  
 For n =16 and using SRSWOR sampling, SE works out to 64 0.525 0.425*79 = . 
Compare it with the SE for n = 25 in problem 1. SE of the sample mean 
was reduced to more or less this level by increasing the size of the SRSWR 
sample from 16 to 25. Work out (ii) & (iii)  
3)  a)  F. SE(m) decreases in inverse proportion to the square root of the 
sample size. 
     b)  F. SRSWOR is more advantageous if the sampling fraction is > 0.5. 
     c)  F. V(Y*) = N 2 V(m). 
Check Your Progress 4  
1) When information on an auxiliary variable ‘x’ related to the variable ‘y’ 
under study is available for each unit of the population. 
2) When P i are proportional toYi . That is, when the variable ‘x’ and ‘y’ are 
linearly related to each other and the regression line passes through the origin.  
3) (a) T; (b) F: they should be homogeneous; (c) T. 
4) The integer ‘k’ nearest to 124/18 is 7. Choose a random start between 1 
and 7 for selecting the sample. Since N = 124 is not a multiple of n = 18, 
two problems arise. (i) Samples with random start 1 to 5 are of size 18 and 
others of size 17. The statistic 
7
124
i i
k y yN =∑ ∑  and not the sample 
mean is an unbiased estimate of M. Both the problems at (i) and (ii) are 
overcome by adopting the circular systematic sampling procedure. 
Check Your Progress 5 
1) a) State-wise lists are available. Stratified sampling with each State (or part 
of it depending on the number of factories) being a stratum is an obvious 
choice. We need to collect details relating to workers in the factories. 
Within each stratum a cluster of factories can be selected and wage data 
relating to all the workers in each selected factory may be collected. 
Alternatively, we could adopt a two-stage sampling – select a sample of 
factories (fsu’s) and a sample of workers (ssu’s) from the selected 
factories, to enhance the efficiency of sampling. SRSWOR would be 
appropriate for each stage of selection.  
