--- Page 52 ---
 
 
53
Measurement and 
Scaling TechniquesUNIT 8 MEASUREMENT AND SCALING 
TECHNIQUES  
Structure 
8.0 Objectives  
8.1 Introduction  
8.2 Concept of Measurement 
8.3 Measurement Issues in Research 
8.4 Scales of Measurement 
8.5 Criteria for Good Measurement  
 8.5.1 Reliability  
 8.5.2 Validity 
 8.5.3 Practicality 
8.6 Errors in Measurements 
8.7 Scaling Techniques 
 8.7.1 Comparative Scaling Techniques 
 8.7.2 Non-Comparative Scaling Techniques 
8.8 Let Us Sum Up 
8.9 Key Words 
8.10 Some Useful Books 
8.11 Answers or Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
8.0 OBJECTIVES 
After going through this Unit, you will be able to: 
• state the concept of measurement and its need; 
• explain the various scales of measurement; 
• discuss the various scaling techniques; and 
• identify the criteria for good measurement. 
8.1 INTRODUCTION 
Measurement is the foundation of scientific enquiry. As we know that  research 
begins with a ‘problem’ or topic. Thinking about a problem results in 
identifying concepts that capture the phenomenon being examined. Concepts 
are mental ideas representing the phenomenon. The process of 
conceptualization involves defining the concepts abstractly in theoretical terms. 
Operationalisation of concepts for research purpose involves moving from the 
abstract to the empirical level. This underlines the need to measure the various 
attributes of the people, the characteristics of objects or phenomenon. Further 
issues like decent work, human wellbeing, happiness, quality of education etc. 
which have several qualitative and quantitative dimensions are emerging 
important issues of research in economics. Such issues are being probed 
 


--- Page 53 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
54 
through development of indicators and composite indexes which necessarily 
involve measurement of such indicators. Hence, a student of economics is 
expected to be well versed in the measurement scales, criteria of good 
measurement, and important scaling techniques. This unit throws light on these 
issues. Let us begin to discuss the concept of measurement. 
8.2 CONCEPT OF MEASUREMENT 
Simply speaking the process of assigning numbers to various attributes of 
people, objects or concepts is known as measurement. Technically, 
measurement is a process of mapping aspects of a domain to other aspects of a 
range according to some rule of correspondence. Tyler(1963) defines 
measurement as, “assignment of numerals according to rules”. Nunally 
(1970)viewed that, “Measurement consists of rules, for assigning numbers to 
objects in such a way to represent quantities of attributes”. Thus, Nunally 
focuses on both rules and manner in which numbers are assigned to an object.  
According to Campbell, “Measurement is defined as the assignment of 
numerals to objects or events according to rules”. The fact that numerals can be 
assigned under different rules leads to different kinds of scales and different 
kinds of measurement. 
Thus, measurement is a process to assign numbers or other symbols to 
characteristics of objects according to certain rules. Assigning numbers permit 
statistical analysis of the resulting data and facilitate the communication of 
measurement rules and results. The rules for assigning numbers hence need to 
be standardized and uniformly applicable. In the assignment process, there 
must be one to one correspondence between the numbers and characteristics 
being measured. In this process, variables can be divided into two basic types –
quantitative andqualitative variables. 
8.3 MEASUREMENT ISSUES IN RESEARCH 
A number of concerns arise in the process of measurement which need to be 
addressed by the researcher. Some of the important issues include the following: 
1) Whether the underlying characteristics of the concept allows ordering 
(ordinal level) or  categorizing  (nominal level)? 
2) Whether the features of the concept are discrete or continuous with fine 
gradation? 
The answer of these two questions will enable to determine the level of 
measurement  inherent to the concept. As a general rule, efforts should be 
made that measurement represent the highest scale of measurement for a 
concept because it allows the use of more powerful statistical techniques 
for analysis. 
3) Another important issue pertains to number of indicators for measurement 
of a concept. Some simple concepts can be measured by one indicator 
whereas abstract concepts are measured with more than one indicators. 
How many indicators are appropriate to measure a concept is to be decided 
by the researcher. 
4) Another measurement issue concerns the source of valid and reliable 
measure. Hence, considerable attention should be given to identify valid 
and reliable measures for the study. 


--- Page 54 ---
 
 
55
Measurement and 
Scaling Techniques
5) Measurement should be free from measurement errors like invalidity error 
and unreliability. 
6) Measurement validity is distinct from internal validity and external validity 
because these two are separate research design issues. 
7) A final measurement issue concerns the proper use of available data. For 
that, a research should be well aware of all available data sources and the 
types of data available with the various data compilation agencies. 
8.4 SCALES OF MEASUREMENT 
Before discussing different levels of measurement, let us remember that there 
are three postulates of measurement: (i) Equalities or identities, (ii) Rank order, 
(iii) Additivity.  
You were introduced the elementary concept and types of scales of 
measurement in Unit 1. Even at the cost of repetition let us recall that Stanley 
S.Stevens (1946) in his seminal paper, “On the theory of scales of 
measurement” published in “Science” classified types of scales into four 
categories: (1) Nominal, (2) Ordinal, (3) Interval, (4) Ratio. 
1) Nominal Scale  
A qualitative scale without order is called nominal scale. In nominal scale 
numbers are used to name identity or classify persons, objects, groups, 
gender, industry type. Even if we assign unique numbers to each value, the 
numbers do not really mean anything. This scale neither has any specific 
order nor it has any value. In case of nominal measurement, statistical 
analysis is attempted in terms of counting or frequency, percentage, 
proportion, mode or coefficient of contingency. Addition, subtraction, 
multiplication and division are not possible under this scale. 
2) Ordinal scale  
A qualitative scale with order is called ordinal scale. In ordinal scale 
numbers denote the rank order of the objects or the individuals. Numbers 
are arranged from highest to lowest or lowest to highest. For example, 
students may be ranked I st, 2 nd and 3 rd in terms of their academic 
achievement. The statistical operations which can be applied in ordinal 
measurement are median, percentiles and rank correlation coefficient. 
Ordinal scales do not provide information about the relative strength of 
ranking. This scale does not convey that the distance between the different 
rank values is equal. Ordinal scales are not equal interval measurement. 
Further this scale does not incorporate absolute zero point.  
3) Interval scale  
Interval scale includes all the characteristics of the nominal and ordinal 
scale of measurement. In interval scale numerically equal distance on the 
scale indicate equal distances in the attributes of the object being measured. 
For example, a scale represent marks of students using the attributes range 
0 to 10, 10 to 20, 20 to 30, 30 to 40 and 40 to 50, and so forth. The mid 
point of each range (ie. 5, 15, 25, 35 and 45 etc.) are equidistance from 
each other. The data obtained from an interval scale is known as interval 
data. The appropriate measures used in this scale are: arithmetic mean, 
standard deviation, Karl Pearson’s coefficient of correlation and tests like t-
test and f-test. We cannot apply coefficient of variation in the interval scale. 


--- Page 55 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
56 
4) Ratio Scale 
Ratio scale has all the characteristics of nominal, ordinal and interval scale. 
It also possesses a conceptually meaningful zero point in which there is a 
total absence of the characteristic being measured. Ratio scales are common 
among physical sciences rather than among social sciences. The examples 
of ratio scales are the measures of height, weight, distance and so on. All 
measures of central tendencies that can be used in this scale include 
geometric and harmonic means. 
The properties of these four scales can be summarized in following tabular 
form: 
Properties
 
Scale    
Category  Ranking Equal 
interval 
Zero Point 
Nominal      
Ordinal     
Interval     
Ratio     
 
         Properties 
Scale 
Indicates 
Difference 
Indicates 
Direction of 
Difference 
Indicates 
Amount of 
Difference 
Absolute 
Zero 
Nominal  ×    
Ordinal × ×   
Interval × × ×  
Ratio × × × × 
You will notice in the above tables that only the ratio scale meets the criteria for 
all four properties of scales of measurement. Interval and Ratio scale data are 
sometimes referred to as parametric and Nominal and Ordinal data are referred to 
as non-parametric. 
Examples of Scales of Measurement – 
Scale  Example    Statistics  
Nominal Gender  
Yes-no 
Students roll number 
Objects/Groups 
Frequency, percentage, proportion Mode, 
Coefficient of contingency, chi-square (x2)  
Ordinal  Class Rank, 
Socio Economic status  
Academic  Achievement 
Median, percentile, rank, correlation, 
Range 
Interval  Student grade point, 
Temperature, Calendar 
dates, Rating Scale  
Mean, correlation, Range, Standard 
deviation, rank order variance, Karl 
pearson’s correlation,  t-test, f-test etc. 
Ratio Weight, Height, Salary, 
Frequency of buying a 
product 
Mean, Median, Mode, Range, Variance, 
Standard deviation, coefficient of variation, 
rank order variance, Karl pearson’s 
correlation, t-test, f-test 


--- Page 56 ---
 
 
57
Measurement and 
Scaling Techniques8.5 CRITERION FOR GOOD MEASUREMENT 
There are three major criteria for evaluating measurement: 
1) Reliability 
2) Validity 
3) Practicality 
8.5.1    Reliability 
Reliability refers to the degree to which the measurement or scale is consistent 
or dependable. If we use same construct again and again for measurement, it 
would lead to same conclusion. Reliability is consistency in drawing conclusion.  
Reliability and Validity 
      
 
 
   Reliable and Valid                Valid but not Reliable       Reliable but not valid 
8.5.2   Validity 
Validity refers to the extent an instrument or scale tests or measures what it 
intends to measure. This means validity is the extent to which differences 
found with a measuring instrument reflect true differences among those being 
tested. This can be done by seeking other relevant evidences. There are three 
types of validity: content validity; criterion validity and construct validity. 
Content validity indicates the extent to which it provides coverage of the issues 
under study. Criterion validity examines how well a given measure relates to 
one or more external criterion based on empirical observations. And, construct 
validity explains the variation observed in tests conducted on several 
individuals. Construct validity is closely related with factor analysis.  
8.5.3    Practicality 
From practical view point, measure should be economical, convenient and 
interpretable. The measure should not be lengthy and difficult. The measure 
can be done by highly specialized persons. 
8.6 ERRORS IN MEASUREMENTS 
Measurement need to be precise and unambiguous for validity and reliability of 
any research study. Hence, measurement should be either free from errors or 
have minimum error. Any measurement usually involves two types of errors: 
• Measurement invalidity 
• Unreliability 
Measurement invalidity refers to the degree to which the measure incorrectly 
captures the concept. 
.  .   .. 
.   .  . . 


--- Page 57 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
58 
Unreliability refers to inconsistency in what the measure produces under 
repeated uses. If any measure, on average give some score for a case on 
variable and gives other score, when it is used again, it is said to be unreliable. 
The possible sources of error are: 
a) Respondent by not expressing strong negative feelings. 
b) Situation wherein interviewer and respondent are not in good rapport. 
c) Measurer – errors may also creep because of incorrect coding, faulty 
tabulations and statistical calculations or behavior or attitude of the 
interviewer. 
d) Instrument errors may also arise because of the defective measuring 
instrument. 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) What do you mean by measurement? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
2) Give examples of interval scale and ratio scale. 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
3) How will you examine the validity of a measurement? 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
4) Identify three measure concerns that need to be addressed in the process of 
measurement. 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………… 


--- Page 58 ---
 
 
59
Measurement and 
Scaling Techniques8.7 SCALING TECHNIQUES 
Scaling describes the way of generation of a continuum upon which measured 
objects are located. Broadly, scaling techniques can be classified into two 
categories: comparative, and non comparative scaling.  
Scaling Techniques 
 
 
 Comparative       Non-comparative  
         Scaling Techniques      Scaling Techniques 
 
 
 
 
 
8.7.1 Comparative Scaling Techniques  
C
omparative scales involve the comparison of objects directly with one 
another. For example, in a study of consumer preferences for different telecom 
services, a respondent may be asked to rank choice according to his 
preferences. In this technique, data must be interpreted in relative terms and 
have only ordinal or rank order properties. In comparative scales small 
differences between stimulus objects can be detected.  
Example  
Rank the following factors in order of your importance in choosing mobile 
services (Assign 1 to most important and 5 to least important factor. Please do 
not repeat the ranks.) 
Factor: Price, connectivity, call drop, Internet, Download speed.  
Rank :……… ……… ……  ……. ………. 
There are various comparative scaling techniques. Three most commonly used 
comparative scaling techniques are discussed here. 
a) Paired comparison  
b) Rank order  
c) Constant sum 
a) Paired Comparison  
The paired comparison is most commonly used scaling technique. This 
method is simply a binary choice. In this method respondents choose the 
stimulus or items in each pair that has the greater magnitude on the choice 
dimension they are instructed to use. This method is used when the study 
requires to distinguish between the two objects. The data obtained in this 
method is ordinal in nature.  
 
Paired 
Comparison 
Rank  
order 
Constant  
Sum 
Continuous 
Rating Scale 
Itemised 
Rating Scale 
Category  
Scale 
Cumulative 
Scale 


--- Page 59 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
60 
Example 
In a study of consumer preferences for the two brands of milk product i.e. 
Amul and Mother Dairy, a consumer is asked to indicate which one of the 
two brands he would prefer for personal use: 
1) Which milk product of the following you prefer on the basis of taste. 
Please tick mark (√). 
 
Amul Mother Dairy 
  
2) Which milk product will you prefer on the basis of packaging? Please 
tick mark (√). 
Amul Mother Dairy 
  
 
3) Which product will you prefer on the basis of price? Please tick mark (√). 
Amul Mother Dairy 
  
 
This technique is useful when the researcher wants to compare two or 
more than two objects. If there are more than two objects (for example 
n objects) to compare, the total comparison will be; 
Number of comparison =
[ ] 1 ;2
n n -  
n= number of objects. 
b) Rank Order 
This method is very popular among researchers and provides ordinal data. 
In this method, respondents are provided various objects and asked to rank 
the objects in the list. Rank order method is less time consuming. In this 
method, if there are n objects, only (n-1) decisions need to be made. 
Respondent can easily understand the instructions for ranking. This 
technique produces ordinal data. 
Example  
Rank the various brands of mobile phone in order of preference. The most 
preferred can be ranked 1, the next as 2 and so on. The least preferred will 
have the last rank. No two brands should receive the same rank number. 
 
 


--- Page 60 ---
 
 
61
Measurement and 
Scaling Techniques
 
Sl. No. Brand Rank 
1 Nokia  
2 Motorola  
3 Samsung  
4 HTC  
5 Karbonn  
6 Spice  
7 Xolo  
8 Gionee  
9 LG  
10 Sony  
 
c) Constant Sum 
In constant sum scaling, respondents are asked to allocate a constant sum 
of units to a specific set of objects on the basis of pre-defined criterion. If 
an object is not important, the respondent can allocate zeropoint and if an 
object is most important may allocate maximum points out of the fixed 
points. The total fixed points are 100. The total may be taken as some 
other value depending on the study.  
Example 
Allocate preferences regarding a movie based on various predefined 
criteria. Respondents were asked to rate each criteria in such a way that the 
total becomes 100. 
Criteria Respondent Preference 
Content Quality 20 
Music 20 
Sound 15 
Story 30 
Breadth of Coverage (local, regional 
Supplements, national & global) 
15 
Total 100 
The data obtained in this method is considered an ordinal scale. The advantage 
of this method is that it provides fine discrimination among objects without 
consuming too much time. However, allocation over large number of objects 
may create confusion for the respondent. This method cannot be used as a 
response strategy with illiterate people and children. 
  


--- Page 61 ---
 
 
Research Design and 
Measurement 
62 
8.7.2 Non Comparative Scaling Techniques 
Non-comparative scaling techniques involve scaling of objects independent to 
some specific standard. Respondent evaluate only one object at a time. For 
example, in a study of consumer preferences for different telecom services, a 
consumer may be asked to rate a list of factors that he/she would consider 
while choosing a particular telecom company. 
Example 
Please rate the following factors you think important in choosing mobile 
service. Rate 1 to least important and 5 to most important (rating could be on 
any scale. In this example, we have used a 5 point scale). 
Factor Price Connectivity  Call 
Drop 
Download 
Speed 
Internet 
Rating      
 
In this scaling technique, data is usually in interval scale. It can be continuous, 
metric/numeric also. Some of the commonly used non-comparative scaling 
techniques are – 
i) Continuous Rating Scale 
ii) Itemised Rating Scale 
iii) Category Scale   
iv) Cumulative Scale 
i) Continuous Rating Scale  
This rating scale is also known as graphic rating scale.In continuous 
rating scale, respondents indicate their rating by marking at appropriate 
position on a line. The line is labeled at both ends from one extreme 
criterion to the other. The line may contain points 0,10,20,…..,100. 
Example 
How would you rate a magazine with regard to its quality. 
Quality 
Indicators 
Scale Measurement 
Content 
Coverage 
Most_________________x__________________Least 
Above 80               60             40              20              0    
Language Most__________x_________________________Least 
 
Presentati
on Style 
Most_________________x__________________Least 
A very large number of ratings are possible if the respondents are literate 
to understand and accurately differentiate the objects. The data generated 
from continuous rating scale can be treated as numeric and interval data. 
The researcher can divide the line into as many categories as desired and 
assign scores based on the categories under which the ratings fall.  
