--- Page 21 ---
UNIT 6 REAL BUSINESS CYCLES  
Structure 
12.0 Objectives 
12.1 Introduction 
12.2  New Classical View on Business Cycle 
12.3  Real Factors vs. Monetary Factors  
12.4 A Baseline RBC Model 
12.5. Inter-temporal Substitution in Labour Supply  
12.6 Impact of Supply Shocks to the Economy 
12.7 New-Keynesian View on Business Cycle 
12.8 Let Us Sum Up 
12.9  Answer/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
12.0 OBJECTIVES 
After going through this unit you would be in a position to  
 describe the salient features of new-classical economics; 
 outline the assumptions and methodology adopted by new-classical 
economics on analysis of business cycles; 
 bring out the important features of real business cycle theory;  
 explain the inter-temporal substitution in labour supply; 
 assess the role of supply shocks; and 
 discuss the new-Keynesian approach to business cycle. 
12.1 INTRODUCTION 
In the previous Unit we mentioned that business cycles are synchronic in the 
sense that the state of recession or boom is prevalent in most industries at the 
same time. Further, certain variables are pro-cyclical while some others are 
counter-cyclical. Examples of pro-cyclical variables are output, employment, 
wages and consumption expenditure. Examples of counter-cyclical variables are 
unemployment, company profits, and stock market prices.  
 
 
Dr. Jagannath Mallick, Independent Researcher, Delhi and Prof. Kaustuva Barik, IGNOU 


--- Page 22 ---
 
 
 
185 
Real Business Cycles There is no consensus among economists about the reasons behind business 
cycles. According to Keynes (1936) fluctuations in investment (and therefore 
employment) is caused by ‘animal spirit’, a sort of human emotion. Fluctuation 
in output gets amplified due to the effect of ‘investment multiplier’. Samuelson 
(1939) showed that the interaction of multiplier and accelerator leads to business 
cycles. According to Austrian economist Joseph A. Schumpeter (1961), business 
cycles are an outcome of the process of innovation and technological change; a 
process called ‘creative destruction’. Schumpeter emphasises on the role of 
entrepreneurs, who undertake innovation – they bring in new technology which 
disrupts existing production processes. Such disruptions in an economy lead to 
substantial fluctuations in employment and output. There have been several other 
theories of business cycles which we have not included in the previous Unit. 
Richard Goodwin (1967), another heterodox economist, ascribes business cycles 
to the fluctuations in the share of workers in total output. During the boom phase 
of business cycle, rising employment leads to higher wages, rise in bargaining 
power of workers, and increase in the share of wages in revenue. This leads to 
decrease in profit share, decrease in accumulation of capital, and consequent 
decline in employment. Eventually the rise in unemployment leads to fall in the 
share of wages in revenue, consequent recovery of profits, and increase in 
accumulation. In sharp contrast to Keynes, Milton Friedman considered the 
changes in money supply to be the major reason behind business cycles. 
According to Friedman, a free market economy is inherently stable. The 
fluctuation in money supply causes business cycles in an economy.  
New classical economists followed the monetarist tradition and emphasized on 
monetary factors. They introduced rational expectations and microfoundation in 
macroeconomic analysis. According to them monetary shocks causes business 
cycles in an economy. The real business cycle theory, however, brings back the 
importance of real factors such as productivity shocks to explain business cycle.  
In this Unit we begin with new-classical view on business cycle and subsequently 
move on to real business cycle theory. We will conclude the Unit with a note on 
new-Keynesian view on business cycle. 
12.2 NEW-CLASSICAL VIEW ON BUSINESS CYCLE 
During the 1950s and 1960s Keynesian economics was very popular – its policy 
prescription was acceptable to researchers as well as policy makers. Milton 
Friedman, however, challenged Keynesian economics during that time. 
According to Friedman, changes in aggregate income are explained mostly by   
monetary policy. Had the government taken recourse to open market operations 
and redeemed bonds and securities during the Great Depression, money supply 
would have increased and the adverse impact would have been lesser. Further, 
Friedman disagreed with the inflation-unemployment trade-off as suggested by 
the Phillips Curve. He introduced expectations into the analysis, and pointed out 
that the Phillips curve is vertical in the short-run. The trade-off is possible only in 


--- Page 23 ---
 
 
 
186 
Theories of  
Business Cycles the short-run; in the long-run, unemployment cannot be brought down below the 
natural rate of unemployment.  
The onset of stagflation during the 1970s further consolidated the dissent on 
Keynesian economics. New-classical economics, led by Robert Lucas and 
Thomas Sargent, brought in a revolution in macroeconomics. New-classical 
economists revived the classical ideas; the analytical tools however were 
different. Thus, new-classical economics is completely opposed to the Keynesian 
policy prescriptions.  
New-classical economics is based on three assumptions: (i) rational expectations 
hypothesis, (ii) continuous market clearing, and (iii) the aggregate supply 
hypothesis. People have rational expectations; they can correctly anticipate the 
effect of government actions; and they take counter-measures to neutralise the 
impact of government policy. A major inference drawn by new-classical 
economics is that policy measures taken by the government are ineffective. Only 
unexpected policy shocks lead to temporary deviations in output and employment 
from their natural levels. The second assumption states that markets clear at any 
point of time. An implication of the above is the equality between demand and 
supply, and the economy is in a state of equilibrium always. New-classical 
economics assumes flexibility in wage rate and prices. Further, adjustments in 
prices and wages are instantaneous. You may be wondering how the labour 
market can clear (i.e., there is no unemployment)! This in fact is a debatable 
assumption of new-classical economics – according to new-classical economists, 
unemployment is a voluntary phenomenon. At the ongoing wage rate anybody 
who is willing to work gets employed. The third assumption states that the supply 
of labour by workers and the supply of output of firms depend upon relative 
prices. This is the famous Lucas supply function discussed in Unit 7.  
Three prominent features of new-classical economics are as follows: (i) 
microfoundation, (ii) dynamic stochastic general equilibrium, and (iii) 
quantitative calibration of the economy. Microfoundation means that 
macroeconomic phenomena are explained through the behaviour of 
microeconomic agents such as households and firms. For example, the decision 
of a household is based on its utility function while that of a firm is based on a 
production function. New-classical models are based on dynamic stochastic 
general equilibrium (DSGE). As the name suggests, these are ‘general 
equilibrium models’ in the sense that they pertain to the whole economy. The 
word ‘dynamic’ reflects the idea that these are inter-temporal models and 
economic agents optimise on their decision-variables over time. Thus, DSGE 
models involve the issue of ‘dynamic optimisation’ (See MEC-203, Block 7). As 
you know, the economy receives various types of shocks, viz., demand shocks, 
supply shocks and policy shocks, which are exogenous. These shocks are 
assumed to be random in nature; thus these models are ‘stochastic’. In simple 
DSGE models there are three inter-related blocks (set of equations), viz., (i) a 


--- Page 24 ---
 
 
 
187 
Real Business Cycles demand block, (ii) a supply block, and (iii) a monetary policy equation (for 
example, policy rule). The equations included in these blocks are derived from 
micro-foundations.  
In order to describe the economy, new-classical economists use the method of 
calibration. The DSGE models require solution to a set of inter-related dynamic 
optimisation problems. Here households and firms make decisions on the basis of 
current and expected future paths for prices and policy variables. This is a 
challenging task as data are not easily available for longer time periods. 
Therefore, in DSGE models researchers make extensive use of numerical 
iteration, so as to replicate the economy. The researcher chooses (from past 
studies) a set of parameters to describe the utility function and production 
function. In the process, they rely on model simulation and take parameter values 
that best fit the empirical data. Such a procedure of comparing the model output 
with empirical data is called calibration. Remember that calibration is different 
from estimation used in econometrics. 
A question arises at this point: Why do employment and output fluctuate in an 
economy, if there is market-clearing all the time? In other words, why do 
business cycles occur? According to new-classical economics, there are two basic 
reasons: (i) inter-temporal substitution between labour and leisure, and (ii) Lucas 
supply function. If the actual real wage rate is higher than the expected real wage 
rate, the household substitutes leisure by labour – thereby working for higher 
number of hours in a day. In the process it supplies more labour. Thus, there is an 
increase in supply of labour, which leads to an increase in output (higher than the 
potential output). As pointed out above, changes in employment are treated as 
voluntary choices of workers – the amount of labour supplied by households 
depends upon their rational expectations about real wages. The ‘Lucas Supply 
Function’ suggests that firms suffer from signal extraction problem and mistake a 
general price rise as a relative price rise. When there is a general price rise, there 
is no relative increase in prices of the products produced by a firm, as the cost of 
production also has gone up. However, firms often see that there is an increase in 
the prices of their products and they increase their production. Thus, there is a 
(positive) deviation in employment and output from their natural levels. This 
leads to a boom or expansion phase in the economy.  
Let us take the opposite scenario. Suppose, households perceive that the actual 
wages they receive is less than expected wage. As a response, households will 
work less (enjoy more leisure) and supply less labour to the market. Decrease in 
supply of labour will result in a (negative) deviation in output from its natural 
level. If the firms perceive that there is a relative decrease in prices of their 
products, they will decrease their output level. Such decline in output will lead to 
a recession in the economy. Thus, while the economy is in equilibrium, there 
could be fluctuation in employment and output.    


--- Page 25 ---
 
 
 
188 
Theories of  
Business Cycles Check Your Progress 1 
1)  What are the basic assumptions of new-classical economics?  
.............................................................................................................................
.............................................................................................................................
.............................................................................................................................
.............................................................................................................................
............................................................................................................................. 
2)  Explain the reasons put forth by new-classical economists for occurrence of 
business cycles in an economy.  
.............................................................................................................................
.............................................................................................................................
.............................................................................................................................
.............................................................................................................................
............................................................................................................................. 
12.3 REAL FACTORS VS. MONETARY FACTORS 
Real business cycle (RBC) theory originated with the publication of a paper in 
1982 by Kydland and Prescott entitled, “Time to Build and Aggregate 
Fluctuations”. Kydland and Prescott stated that business cycle is not due to 
fluctuation in monetary variables; rather it is caused by real shocks to the 
economy. The RBC theory is a distinct class of new-classical macroeconomics. 
Therefore, the basic assumptions and analytical tools of new-classical models are 
applied in RBC models also. In fact, Kydland and Presott were the first to 
characterise the general equilibrium of a full-fledged dynamic and stochastic 
macroeconomic model.  
There could be two types of shocks to the economy: (i) nominal shocks, and (ii) 
real shocks. The nominal shocks (shocks to money supply or money demand) 
affect the LM curve. The real shocks (shocks to the production function, real 
government spending, or to savings and consumption decisions) affect the IS 
curve. In other words, real shocks affect the goods market equilibrium and the 
labour market equilibrium. 
As the name suggests, the RBC models ascribe ‘real shocks’ as the prime reason 
behind business cycles. The shocks to the production function are known as 
supply shocks or productivity shocks. Supply shocks can arise due to the 
following reasons:  
(i) development of new products or production methods (production 
technology) 
(ii) changes in the quality of labour or capital  
(iii) changes in the availability of raw materials (relative prices, oil crisis) 
(iv) unusually good or bad weather (drought, flood, earthquake) 


--- Page 26 ---
 
 
 
189 
Real Business Cycles (v) changes in government regulations affecting production (tax rate, 
subsidies, etc.) 
The positive or beneficial productivity shocks result in economic booms, 
whereas the negative or adverse productivity shocks cause recessions in an 
economy. Let us discuss the effect of a temporary adverse supply shock on the 
economy (see Fig. 12.1). There will be a decline in the marginal productivity 
of labour, which will reduce the demand for labour. Consequently, there will a 
fall in the real wage. Households will see that their real wage has declined and 
they will supply lower quantity of labour. This will lead to a fall in the level of 
output (consequently, a recession). A beneficial productivity shock, on the 
other hand, would result in an economic boom. There would be temporary 
hike in productivity in the economy. This will cause an increase in investment 
and work effort in the current period. Consequently, both the real output and 
consumption spending will be increased. Once the effect of the supply shock 
dies down, the economy will be back to natural rate of employment and 
output. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 12.1: Effect of Temporary Adverse Supply Shock 
The RBC theory is based on two basic principles: (i) money has little role to play 
in business cycles, and (ii) business cycles occur as a response of rational 
economic agents (firms and households) to real shocks. The economy is 
continuously at equilibrium – the supply of labour and output are according to 
rational expectations of economic agents.  
The RBC theory has certain differences with new-classical economics. There are 
at least three differences between the real business cycle theory and the new 
classical school of thought: (i) the RBC theory does not distinguish between 
short-run and long-run. It integrates theory of economic growth with business 
cycle theory. (ii) Lucas advocated that households and firms get fooled – they 
cannot extract correct signal from price changes in the economy. This results in 
deviation of actual output from potential output. The RBC theory assumes that 
households and firms have complete information. (iii) RBC theory assumes that 
supply shocks arise from real factors while new-classical economics assumes that 
shocks arise from monetary factors.  
  w 
 w1 
 w2 
 L1  L2 
 L 
 D௅
ଶ  
 SL 
 D௅
ଵ  


--- Page 27 ---
 
 
 
190 
Theories of  
Business Cycles The implications of RBC theory are as follows: (i) The government should not 
try to stabilise output level; it should try to stabilise prices (i.e., inflation should 
be kept under control – inflation targeting). (ii) The government should not 
influence aggregate demand through fiscal policy measures (taxes and subsidies), 
as fiscal measures may not be effective (due to the issue of Ricardian 
equivalence). (iii) The government should use fiscal policy to stimulate the 
supply side of the economy (to provide positive supply shocks to the economy).  
Real business cycle is criticised on certain grounds: Its assumption of 
instantaneous market clearing is unrealistic. Prices and wages are rigid in an 
economy. Further, there is little evidence of large aggregate technology shocks in 
an economy.  
12.4  A BASELINE RBC MODEL 
Let us discuss how the fluctuations of aggregated macroeconomic variables can 
be explained through a general equilibrium model. Recall from microeconomic 
theory that the Walrasian model (a baseline general equilibrium model) is a 
competitive model without any of the following: (i) asymmetric information, (ii) 
externalities, (iii) missing markets, and (iv) other imperfections. If we can 
explain macroeconomic fluctuations through a Walrasian model, there is no 
fundamental departure from conventional microeconomic analysis. Real-
business-cycle theory aims to analyse how a Walrasian model provides a good 
explanation of the nature and character of observed fluctuations. 
The Ramsey model (see Unit 8) can be seen as a baseline general equilibrium 
model. The model excludes market imperfections; and there is no heterogeneity 
among households. It is based on microfoundation in the sense that it considers a 
representative household and a representative firm. The representative household 
consumes goods and services which are homogenous. Goods and services 
produced in the economy are used for consumption by households as well as 
investment by firms. The representative household supplies labour to the firm. 
The household determines the quantity of labour to be supplied on the basis of a 
utility function. Recall that in the Ramsay model an economy converges to a 
balanced growth path and then grows smoothly.  
Let us try to extend the Ramsey model to include aggregate macroeconomic 
fluctuations. In the absence of shocks, the economy is on a steady state. 
Therefore, we need to incorporate certain disturbance to the model. 
Suppose that there is certain disturbance or shock to the economy. What will be 
the impact of such shocks? Will the impact of the shock dissipate (die down) 
after some periods or will it generate fluctuations in output in the economy? The 
sources of shocks to an economy could be of two types: (i) there could be a shock 
to the economy’s technology. The production technology of the economy 
undergoes change. Such shocks will lead to a change in the production function 
across periods. (ii) Change in government purchases also could be a source of 
disturbance to the economy. These two types of shocks are real disturbances; 
they are not monetary or nominal disturbances. The change in technology leads 


--- Page 28 ---
 
 
 
191 
Real Business Cycles to change in the amount of output produced from a given quantity of inputs. 
Similarly, the change in government-purchases leads to change in the quantity of 
goods that are available to the private economy for a given level of production. 
Since the shocks to an economy are real factors, the models are known as real-
business-cycle (RBC) models. 
We need to make a second modification in the Ramsey model – we allow for 
change in employment. In the traditional business cycle theories, labour supply is 
assumed to be exogenous; labour supply is either constant or growing smoothly. 
As mentioned above, the RBC models are based on microfoundation such that 
labour supply is determined by a utility function. Households allocate their time 
between work and leisure – an increase in the time allocated to work implies an 
increase in the supply of labour and a decrease in the quantity of leisure.  
Let us assume that the economy consists of a large number of homogenous price-
taking firms and households. There are two inputs to the production function, 
viz., capital (K) and labour (L). Let us assume that technology is exogenous and it 
is given by 𝐴௧ for time period ‘t ’. Further, let us assume that the functional form 
of the production function is Cobb-Douglas. 
Thus, output in period t is 
𝑌௧ = 𝐴௧𝐹(𝐾௧, 𝐿௧) = 𝐾௧
஑ (𝐴௧𝐿௧)ଵି஑      … (12.1) 
where 0< α <1 
We know that output is divided among consumption ( C), investment ( I), and 
government purchases ( G). If δ is the depreciation rate of capital in each period, 
the capital stock in period (t + 1) is 
𝐾௧ାଵ = 𝐾௧ + 𝐼௧ − 𝛿𝐾௧ 
= 𝐾௧ + 𝑌௧ − 𝐶௧−𝐺௧ − 𝛿𝐾௧       … (12.2) 
(Since 𝐶௧ + 𝐼௧ + 𝐺௧ = 𝑌௧; we have 𝐼௧ = 𝑌௧ − 𝐶௧ − 𝐺௧ ) 
Let us consider that labour and capital are paid their marginal products. Thus, the 
real wage and the real interest rate in period t are 
𝑤௧ = (1 − α) 𝐴௧𝐾௧
஑ (𝐴௧𝐿௧)ି஑     
= (1 − α) 𝐴௧(𝐾௧/𝐴௧𝐿௧)ି஑         … (12.3) 
and, 
𝑟௧ = α (𝐴௧𝐿௧/𝐾௧)ଵି஑            … (12.4) 
(You can derive equation (12.3) and equation (12.4) from equation (12.1) by 
taking partial derivatives with respect to L and K respectively)  
The representative household maximizes the expected value of the utility 
function 
 U = ∑ 𝑒ିఘ௧ஶ
௧ୀ଴  𝑢(𝑐௧,1 − 𝑙௧)
ே ೟
ு
      … (12.5) 


--- Page 29 ---
 
 
 
192 
Theories of  
Business Cycles where, u (•) is the instantaneous utility function. Here, ρ is the discount rate, 
which represents time preference of utility (i.e., the rate at which future income is 
discounted). Further, 𝑁௧ is population and H is the number of households. Then, 
the average number of members in each household is 𝑁௧ 𝐻⁄ . If the exogenous 
growth rate of population is n:   
𝑙𝑛 𝑁௧ = 𝑁ഥ + 𝑛𝑡,        ... (12.6) 
where  n<𝜌  
Thus, the level of 𝑁௧ is given by 𝑁௧ = 𝑒ேഥ ା௡௧  
Notice that u(•) has two factors in equation (12.5): (i) consumption per member 
of the household ( 𝑐௧), and (ii) leisure per member ( 𝑙௧). Leisure is the difference 
between the time endowment per member (normalized to 1 for simplicity) and 
the amount each member works. As all households are homogenous, c = C/N, and 
l = L/N.  
Let us first discuss about the assumption on the technology shocks. To capture 
trend growth, we assume the following functional form for technology:   
𝑙𝑛 𝐴௧ = 𝐴̅ + 𝑔𝑡       ... (12.7) 
where g is the rate of technological progress. Technology in the above 
specification is not subjected to random shocks. In order to include random 
disturbances in technology we consider the following functional form:  
𝑙𝑛 𝐴௧ = 𝐴̅ + 𝑔𝑡 + 𝐴௧෪        ... (12.8) 
where 𝐴ሚ  is the random disturbances. The term 𝐴௧෪ follows ﬁrst-order 
autoregressive process. That is,   
𝐴௧෪ =  𝜌஺ 𝐴௧ିଵ෫ + 𝜀஺ ,௧,    −1 < 𝜌஺ < 1   ... (12.9) 
where, the 𝜀஺ ,௧ is a stochastic error term (white noise). It means that 𝜀஺ ,௧  has zero 
mean and zero correlation with other variables in the equation. Hence, equation 
(12.9) indicates that the random component 𝐴௧ ෪  is a fraction 𝜌஺  of the previous 
period’s value and a white noise error. The effect of a shock to technology 
disappears gradually over time.  
We follow a similar functional form for government purchases: It has a trend 
component and a white-noise component. There is a trend growth rate of per 
capita government purchases, but over time government purchases may become 
arbitrarily large or arbitrarily small relative to the economy. Thus, 
𝑙𝑛 𝐺௧ = 𝐺̅ + (𝑛 + 𝑔)𝑡 + 𝐺௧෪ ,    −1<𝜌஺ < 1,  ... (12.10) 
𝐺௧෪ = 𝜌ீ 𝐺௧ିଵത
തതതതത + 𝜀ீ ,௧,      −1<𝜌஺ < 1,  ... (12.11) 
where the 𝜀ீ ,௧ is white noise. This completes the description of the RBC model. 


--- Page 30 ---
 
 
 
193 
Real Business Cycles 12.5  INTER-TEMPORAL SUBSTITUTION IN 
LABOUR SUPPLY 
We noted in the previous section that major differences between RBC model and 
the Ramsey model are: (i) the inclusion of leisure in the utility function, and (ii) 
the introduction of randomness in technology and government purchases as the 
sources of macroeconomic aggregate fluctuations.  
Let us focus on the introduction of leisure in the utility function. For simplicity 
assume that the household lives only for one period and has only one member, 
which has no initial wealth. Now, the objective function of the household is 
ln 𝑐 + 𝑏 ln(1 − 𝑙) and its budget constraint is 𝑐 = 𝑤𝑙 . Hence, the Lagrangian 
maximization problem is: 
𝜁 = ln 𝑐 + b ln(1 − 𝑙) + 𝜆(𝑤𝑙 − 𝑐)      ... (12.12) 
The ﬁrst-order conditions for c and 𝑙 are as follows: 
ଵ
௖
− 𝜆 = 0,        ... (12.13) 
−
௕
ଵି௟ + 𝜆𝑤 = 0,       ... (12.14) 
From equations (12.13), we find that 𝜆 =
ଵ
௖ =
ଵ
௪௟   (since 𝑐 = 𝑤𝑙 as per the budget 
constraint).  
Now, substituting the value of 𝜆 in equation (12.14), we obtain 
−
௕
ଵି௟ +
ଵ
௪௟ 𝑤 = 0  
That is, 
−
௕
ଵି௟ +
ଵ
௟ = 0       ... (12.15) 
The labour supply that satisfies equation (12.15) is independent of the wage rate 
as wage rate is not included in this equation. The reason is that utility is 
logarithmic in consumption and the household has no initial wealth. The income 
effect and substitution effect of a change in the wage rate offset each other. This 
is the static case, as we assumed that the household lives for one period. 
If we consider the case where the household lives for two periods or more than 
two periods, then the wage variations do affect labour supply. Let us continue to 
assume that household has no initial wealth with one member who lives for two 
periods. Also, assume that there is no uncertainty about the interest rate or the 
second-period wage. 
The household’s lifetime budget constraint is now 
𝑐ଵ +
ଵ
ଵା௥
𝑐ଶ = 𝑤ଵ 𝑙ଵ +
ଵ
ଵା௥ 𝑤ଶ 𝑙ଶ        ... (12.16) 
where r is the real interest rate. The Lagrangian maximization problem is: 
𝜁 = ln 𝑐ଵ + b ln(1 − 𝑙ଵ ) + 𝑒ିఘ [ln 𝑐ଶ + b ln(1 − 𝑙ଶ )] 
