--- Page 90 ---
 
 
•  
Structural Equation 
Modeling 
91 
-II • Maximum likelihood (ML) is usually the default method in most programs 
because it yields the most precise (smallest variance) estimates when the 
data are normal. 
• Generalized least squares  (GLS) has the same optimal properties as ML 
under normality. 
• The asymptotically distribution free (ADF) method has no distributional 
assumptions and hence is most general, but it is impractical with many 
variables and inaccurate without very large sample sizes. 
Satorra and Bentler (1988, 1994, and 2001) and Satorra (2000) also developed 
an adjustment for non-normality that can be applied to the ML, GLS, or EDT 
chi-square test statistics. Briefly, the Satorra–Bentler scaled χ2 is a correction 
to the χ2 test statistic (Satorra & Bentler, 2001). EQS also corrects the standard 
errors for parameter estimates to adjust for the extent of non-normality (Bentler 
& Dijkastra, 1985). 
Sample size and plausibility of the normality and independent assumptions 
must be considered while choosing the suitable estimation technique. ML, the 
Scaled ML, or GLS estimators may be good choices with medium (over 120) 
to large samples and evidence of the plausibility of the normality assumptions. 
ML estimation is currently the most frequently used estimation method in 
SEM. In medium (over 120) to large samples the scaled ML test statistic is a 
good choice with non-normality or suspected dependence among factors and 
errors. In small samples (60 to 120) the Yuan–Bentler test statistic appears 
best. The test statistic based on the ADF estimator (without adjustment) is 
inappropriate choice under all conditions unless the sample size is very large (> 
2,500).  
17.10.3   Model Evaluation 
A central issue addressed by SEM is how to assess the fit between observed 
data and the hypothesized model ideally operationalized as an evaluation of the 
degree of discrepancy between the true population covariance matrix and that 
implied by the model’s structural and non structural parameters. As the 
population parameter values are rarely identified, the difference between an 
observed, sample-based covariance matrix and that implicit by parameter 
estimates must serve to approximate the population discrepancy. The observed 
data will fit the model perfectly for a just identified model. The system of 
equations expressing each model parameter as a function of the observed 
(co)variances is uniquely solvable; thus, the sample estimate of the model-
implied covariance matrix will, by default, equal the sample estimate of the 
population covariance matrix. However, if a model is over identified, it is 
unlikely that these two matrices are equal as the system of equations 
(expressing model parameters as functions of observed variances and 
covariances) is solvable in more than a single way. 
Abiding by a universal desire for parsimony, over identified models tend to be 
of more substantive interest than just identified ones because they characterize 
simpler potential explanations of the observed associations. While data-model 
fit for such models was initially conceived as a formal statistical test of the 
discrepancy between the true and model-implied covariance matrices, such a 
test now is often viewed as overly strict given its power to detect even trivial 
deviations of a proposed model from reality. Hence, many alternative 


--- Page 91 ---
 
 
•  
Quantitative Methods-II 
92 
assessment strategies have emerged and continue to be developed. Data-model 
fit indices for such assessment can be categorized roughly into three broad 
classes: 
• Absolute indices assess the overall discrepancy between observed and 
implied covariance matrices; fit improves as more parameters are added to 
the model and degrees of freedom decrease: for example, the standardized 
root mean square residual (SRMR), the chi-square test(recommended to be 
reported mostly for its historical significance), and the goodness-of-fit 
index (GFI). 
• Parsimonious indices assess the overall discrepancy between observed and 
implied covariance matrices while taking into consideration a model’s 
complexity; fit improves as more parameters are added to the model, as 
long as those parameters are making a useful contribution: for example, the 
root mean square error of approximation(RMSEA) with its associated 
confidence interval, the Akaike information criterion (AIC) for fit 
comparisons across non-nested models, and the adjusted goodness-of-fit 
index (AGFI). 
• Incremental indices  assess absolute or parsimonious fit relative to a 
baseline model, usually the null model (a model that specifies no relations 
among measured variables): for example, the comparative fit index (CFI), 
the normed fit index (NFI), and the non-normed fit index (NNFI). 
SEM software programs routinely report a handful of goodness-of-fit indices. 
Some of these indices work better than others under certain conditions. It is 
generally recommended that multiple indices be considered simultaneously 
when overall model fit is evaluated. For instance, Hu and Bentler (1999) 
proposed a 2-index strategy that is, reporting SRMR along with one of the fit 
indices (e.g., RNI, CFI, or RMSEA). The authors also suggested the following 
criteria for an indication of good model-data fit using those indices: RNI (or 
CFI) ≥ .95, SRMR ≤ .08, and RMSEA ≤ .06. Despite the sample size 
sensitivity problem with the chi-square test, reporting the model chi-square 
value with its degrees of freedom in addition to the other fit indices is 
recommended. If, after considering several indices, data model fit is deemed 
acceptable (and judged best compared to competing models, if applicable),the 
model is reserved as rational, and individual parameters may be interpreted. If, 
however, evidence suggests unacceptable data-model fit, the next and often 
final stage in the SEM process is considered: modifying the model to improve 
fit in hopes of also improving the model’s correspondence to reality. 
17.10.4   Model Modification 
Any hypothesized model is only an approximation to reality; the question 
remains is one of degree of that misspecification. With regard to external 
specification errors—when irrelevant variables are included in the model or 
substantively important ones remain left out—remediation can only occur by 
respecifying the model based on more relevant theory. On the other hand, 
internal specification errors—when unimportant paths among variables were 
included or when important paths were omitted—can potentially be diagnosed 
and remedied using Wald statistics (predicted increase in chi-square if a 
previously estimated parameter were fixed to some known value, e.g., zero) 
and Lagrange multiplier statistics (also referred to as modification indices; 
estimated decrease in chi-square if a previously fixed parameter were to be 
estimated).  All are asymptotically equivalent under the null hypothesis but 


--- Page 92 ---
 
 
•  
Structural Equation 
Modeling 
93 
-II approach model modification differently. As these tests’ recommendations are 
directly motivated by the data and not by theoretical considerations, any 
resulting respecifications must be viewed as exploratory in nature and might 
not lead to a model that resembles reality any more closely than the one(s) 
initially conceptualized. 
Chi-square difference test 
If models are nested, that is, models are subsets of each other, the χ2 value for 
the larger model is subtracted from the χ2 value for the smaller, nested model 
and the difference, also χ2, is evaluated with degrees of freedom equal to the 
difference between the degrees of freedom in the two models. When the data 
are normally distributed, the chi-squares can simply be subtracted. However, 
when the data are non normal and the Satorra–Bentler scaled chi-square is 
employed, an adjustment is required (Satorra, 2000; Satorra &Bentler, 2001) so 
that the S–B χ2 difference test is distributed as a chi-square.  
Chi-square difference tests are popular methods for comparison of nested 
models especially when, as in this example, there are two nested a priori 
models of interest; however, a potential problem arises when sample sizes are 
small. Because of the relationship between sample size and χ2, it is hard to 
detect a difference between models with small sample sizes. 
Lagrange Multiplier (LM) test 
The LM test also compares nested models but requires estimation of only one 
model. The LM test asks would the model be improved if one or more of the 
parameters in the model that are currently fixed were estimated. Or, equivalently, 
what parameters should be added to the model to improve the fit of the model? 
There are many approaches to using the LM tests in model modifications. It is 
possible and often desirable to look only at certain parts of the model for 
possible change although it is also possible to examine the entire model for 
potential additions. 
The LM test can be examined either univariately or multivariately. There is a 
danger in examining only the results of univariate LM tests because overlapping 
variance between parameter estimates may make several parameters appear as if 
their addition would significantly improve the model. All significant parameters 
are candidates for inclusion by the results of univariate LM tests, but the 
multivariate LM test identifies the single parameter that would lead to the largest 
drop in the model χ2 and calculates the expected change in χ2 if this parameter 
was added. After this variance is removed, the next parameter that accounts for the 
largest drop in model χ2 is assessed, similarly. After a few candidates for 
parameter additions are identified, it is best to add these parameters to the model 
and repeat the process with a new LM test, if necessary. 
Wald test 
While the LM test asks which parameters, if any, should be added to a model, 
the Wald test asks which, if any, could be deleted. Are there any parameters 
that are currently being estimated that could instead be fixed to zero? Or, 
equivalently, which parameters are not necessary in the model? The Wald test 
is analogous to backward deletion of variables in stepwise regression, in which 
one seeks a non significant change in R 2 when variables are left out. However,  
if the goal had been the development of a parsimonious model, the Wald test 
could have been examined to evaluate deletion of unnecessary parameters. 


--- Page 93 ---
 
 
•  
Quantitative Methods-II 
94 
Finally, no matter how complex the model under study, it is always 
conceivable that other variables or causal assumptions that the researcher had 
failed to consider can account for the observed relationships. To enhance the 
theoretical value of their investigations, researchers are well advised to 
consider also models that are almost equivalent to the one reported. These are 
models that fit the analyzed data set almost as well as the reported model and 
that may offer interesting alternative theoretical interpretations.  
Comparison of Nested Models 
In addition to evaluating the overall model fit and specific parameter estimates, 
it is also possible to statistically compare nested models to one another. Nested 
models are models that are subsets of one another. When theories can be 
specified as nested hypotheses, each model might represent a different theory. 
These nested models are statistically compared, thus providing a strong test for 
competing models. Some of the common variance among the items may be due 
to wording and the general domain area (e.g., health problems, relationships 
problems), not solely due to the underlying constructs. We can compare our 
model to a model that also includes paths that account for the variance 
explained by the general domain or wording of the item. The model with the 
added paths to account for this variability would be considered the full model. 
To test this hypothesis, the chi-square from the model with paths added to 
account for domain and wording would be subtracted from the chi-square for 
the nested model in that does not account for common domains and wording 
among the items. The corresponding degrees of freedom for these two models 
would also be subtracted. Given nested models and normally distributed data, 
the difference between two chi-squares is a chi-square with degrees of freedom 
equal to the difference in degrees of freedom between the two models. The 
significance of the chi-square difference test can then be assessed in the usual 
manner. If the difference is significant, the fuller model that includes the extra 
paths is needed to explain the data. If the difference is not significant, the 
nested model, which is more parsimonious than the fuller model, would be 
accepted as the preferred model.  
17.10.5   Reporting the Results 
The final step is to precisely and completely describe the analysis in written reports. 
How authors structure the results section obviously is dictated by the particular 
model(s) and research questions under study. It is the researcher’s responsibility to 
provide access to data in order to facilitate verification of the obtained results: If 
moment-level data were analyzed, a covariance matrix (or correlation matrix with 
standard deviations) should be offered in a table or appendix; if raw data were used, 
information on how to obtain access should be provided. 
Results from both the measurement and structural phases should be presented. 
Judging the overall quality of a hypothesized model usually is presented early 
in the results section or overidentified models. Given that available data-model 
fit indices can lead to inconsistent conclusions, researchers should consider fit 
results from different classes so readers can arrive at a more complete picture 
regarding an model’s acceptability. Also, a comparison of fit across multiple, a 
priori specified alternative models can help in weighing the relative merits of 
preferring one model over others. As illustrated, when competing models are 
nested, a formal chi-square difference test is available to judge if a more 
restrictive-but also more parsimonious-model can elucidate the observed data 
equally well, without a considerable loss in data-model fit (alternative models that 


--- Page 94 ---
 
 
•  
Structural Equation 
Modeling 
95 
-II are not nested have traditionally been compared only descriptively—relative 
evaluations of values are recommended, with smaller values indicating better fit—
but recent methodological developments suggest statistical approaches as well). 
If post hoc model modifications are performed following unacceptable data-model 
fit from either the measurement or structural phase of the analysis, authors should 
give a thorough account of the nature and reasons (both statistical and 
theoretical)for the respecification(s), including summary results from Lagrange 
multiplier tests and revised final fit results. If data-model fit has been assessed and 
believed to be satisfactory, with or without respecification ,more detailed results 
are offered, usually in the form of individual unstandardized and standardized 
parameter estimates for each structural equation of interest, together with 
associated standard errors and/or test statistics and coefficients of determination. 
When latent variables are part of a model, estimates of their construct reliability 
should be presented, with values ideally falling above .70 or .80. 
Researcher should provide a logic of what implications the results from the SEM 
analysis have on the theory or theories that gave rise to the initial model(s). Claims 
that a well-fitting model was “confirmed” or that a particular theory was proven to 
be “true,” especially after post hoc respecifications, should be avoided. Such 
statements are greatly deceptive given that alternative, structurally different, yet 
mathematically equivalent models always exist that would produce identical data-
model fit results and thus would explain the data equally well. At most, a model 
with acceptable fit may be interpreted as one reasonable explanation for the 
associations observed in the data. From this perspective, a SEM analysis should be 
evaluated from a disconfirmatory, rather than a confirmatory perspective. Based 
on unacceptable data model fit results, theories can be shown to be false but not 
proven to be true by acceptable data-model fit. 
If evidence of data-model misfit was presented and a model was modified 
based on statistical results from Lagrange multiplier tests, readers must be 
made aware of potential model overfitting and the capitalization on chance. 
Statistically rather than theoretically based respecifications are purely 
exploratory and might say little about the true model underlying the data. 
While some model modifications seem appropriate and theoretically justifiable 
(usually, minor respecifications of the measurement portion are more easily 
defensible than those in the structural portion of a model), they only address 
internal specification errors and should be cross-validated with data from new 
and independent samples. Finally, the interpretation of individual parameter 
estimates can involve explicit causal language, as long as this is done from 
within the context of the particular causal theory proposed and the 
possibility/probability of alternative explanations is raised unequivocally. 
Though some might disagree, we think that explicit causal statements are more 
honest than implicit ones and are more useful in articulating a study’s practical 
implications; after all, is not causality the ultimate aim of science. 
In the end, SEM is a powerful disconfirmatory tool at the researcher’s disposal 
for testing and interpreting theoretically derived causal hypotheses from within 
an a priori specified causal system of observed and/or latent variables. 
However, we urge authors to resist the apparently still popular belief that the 
main goal of SEM is to achieve satisfactory data-model fit results; rather, it is 
to get one step closer to the “truth.” If it is true that a proposed model does not 
reflect reality, then reaching a conclusion of misfit between data and model 
should be a desirable goal, not one to be avoided by careless respecifications 
until satisfactory levels of fit are achieved. 


--- Page 95 ---
 
 
•  
Quantitative Methods-II 
96 
17.11 AN EXAMPLE OF SEM  
For example, we take some fictitious data in which anxiety was measured.  We 
performed an confirmatory factor analysis in which we defined anxiety as 
consisting of four components, namely, affective, behavioral, cognitive and 
physiological symptoms. Thus, we specified a model which looked like as the 
figure below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANX 
     cognitive 
affective 
behavioural 
physiological 
fearfulness 
obsession 
 
Poor 
concentratio
n 
anger 
reduced  
QOL 
avoidance 
compulsion 
isolation 
heart rate 
dry mouth 
sweating 
C1 
C2 
C3 
A1 
A2 
A3 
B1 
B2 
B3 
p1 
p2 
P3 
sadness 


--- Page 96 ---
 
 
•  
Structural Equation 
Modeling 
97 
-II The next step is to estimate the parameters of the model. The software 
performs this step and provides final results of parameters that produce best fit 
to data possible.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 shows only 2 of the 4 components of anxiety. Above each arrow from 
a latent variable to a variable is a number, called the path coefficient. This can 
range from –1.0 to 1.0, with higher numbers (positive or negative) showing a 
stronger association. As can be seen, the variable “obsessions” doesn’t fit very 
well with the cognitive trait; and the variable “anger” doesn’t seem to go with 
the affective trait. The numbers over the variable names are the SMRs, which 
are the squared values of the path coefficients; they are interpreted in the same 
way as R2 multiple regression-in terms of how much of the variance in one 
variable is explained by, or are in common with, the other variable. Finally, the 
numbers over the arrows between the error terms and the variables are the 
variances of the errors. You’ll note that the sum of the SMR plus the error 
variance for each variable is 1.0; that is, all the variance of a variable is divided 
between that shared with the latent variable and error. The cognitive domain is 
correlated more highly with the latent trait of anxiety than is the affective 
realm, as reflected in their respective path coefficients. 
The next step is model specification stage. Although no mathematics is 
involved, it is probably the most difficult—and most important—part. It is the 
most difficult because it requires the most thought and understanding of the 
C 0.6
.97 
.7
.35 
.03 
ANX 
     cognitive 
affective 
fearfulness 
obsession 
 
poor 
concentration 
sadness 
 
anger 
 
reduced  
QOL 
 
0.73 
0.24 
C1 
C2 
C3 
A2 
A3 
0.63 
0.6
0.21 
0.72 
0.18 
0.55 
.60 
.65 
.96 
.48 
.97 
.7
.40 
.35 
.04 
.52 
.03 
.3 


--- Page 97 ---
 
 
•  
Quantitative Methods-II 
98 
theoretical model of the purported influences. No computer program can help 
us at this stage, only our knowledge of the field. It is the most important step 
because everything depends on how well we specify the model. The computer 
programs may help us in determining whether some variables aren’t important, 
we can play with different paths to see whether they improve the model or not. 
However, the primary cause of poorly fitting is the omission of crucial 
variables. 
The next step is relatively easy. The main focus is on the paths—from the 
latent variable to the measured variables and from that latent variable to the 
next one in the path. Once we have cleaned up the model by pruning 
noncontributory paths, we can examine the fit of the overall model. The most 
common index of how well the data match the model is RMSEA.  it sees how 
much the data deviate from the model. Values over 0.10 are considered to be a 
bad fit, those less than 0.08 reflect a reasonable fit, and values less than 0.05 
indicate a good fit. 
Given is the table showing RMSEA of the model:  
RMSEA 
Model RMSEA LO 90 HI 90 PCLOSE  
Independence model .100 .087 .115 .000 
PCLOSE = .000 for the Independence model. Under the hypothesis of “close 
fit” (i.e., that RMSEA is no greater than .05 in the population), the probability 
of getting a sample RMSEA as large as .100 is .000. 
17.12 SOFTWARE PROGRAMS FOR SEM  
Most SEM analyses are conducted using one of the specialized SEM software 
programs. However, there are many options, and the choice is not always easy. 
Below is a list of the commonly used programs for SEM. Special features of 
each program are briefly discussed. It is important to note that this list of 
programs and their associated features is by no means comprehensive. This is a 
rapidly changing area and new features are regularly added to the programs.  
17.12.1 LISREL 
LISREL (linear structural relationships) is one of the earliest SEM programs 
and perhaps the most frequently referenced program in SEM articles. Its 
version 9.1 has three components: PRELIS, SIMPLIS, and LISREL. PRELIS 
(pre-LISREL) is used in the data preparation stage when raw data are available. 
Its main functions include checking distributional assumptions, such as 
univariate and multivariate normality, imputing data for missing observations, 
and calculating summary statistics, such as Pearson covariances for continuous 
variables, polychoricor polyserial correlations for categorical variables, means, 
or asymptotic covariance matrix of variances and covariances (required for 
asymptotically distribution-free estimator or Satorra and Bentler’s scaled chi-
square and robust standard errors). PRELIS can be used as a stand-alone 
program or in conjunction with other programs. 
Summary statistics or raw data can be read by SIMPLIS or LISREL for the 
estimation of SEM models. The LISREL syntax requires understanding of 


--- Page 98 ---
 
 
•  
Structural Equation 
Modeling 
99 
-II matrix notation while the SIMPLIS syntax is equation-based and uses variable 
names defined by users. Both LISREL and SIMPLIS syntax can be built 
through interactive LISREL by entering information for the model construction 
wizards. Alternatively, syntax can be built by drawing the models on the Path 
Diagram screen. 
LISREL 9.1 allows the analysis of multilevel models for hierarchical data in 
addition to the core models. A free student version of the program, which has 
the same features as the full version but limits the number of observed 
variables to12, is available from the web site of Scientific 
SoftwareInternational,Inc. (http://www.ssicentral.com). This web site also 
offers a list of illustrative examples of LISREL’s basic and new features. 
17.12.2 EQS 
Version 6.1 of EQS (Equations) provides many general statistical functions 
including descriptive statistics, t-test, ANOVA, multiple regression, 
nonparametric statistical analysis, and EFA. Various data exploration plots, 
such as scatter plot, histogram, and matrix plot are readily available in EQS for 
users to gain intuitive insights into modelling problems. Similar to LISREL, 
EQS allows different ways of writing syntax for model specification. 
The program can generate syntax through the available templates under the 
“Build_EQS” menu, which prompts the user to enter information regarding the 
model and data for analysis, or through the Diagrammer, which allows the user 
to draw the model. Unlike LISREL, however, data screening (information 
about missing pattern and distribution of observed variables) and model 
estimation are performed in one run in EQS when raw data are available. 
Model-based imputation that relies on a predictive distribution of the missing 
data is also available in EQS. Moreover, EQS generates a number of alternative 
model chi-square statistics for non normal or categorical data when raw data 
are available. The program can also estimate multilevel models for hierarchical 
data. Visit http://www.mvsoft.com for a comprehensive list of EQS’s basic 
functions and notable features. 
17.12.3 Mplus 
Version 7.3 of the Mplus program includes a Base program and three add-on 
modules. The Mplus Base program can analyze almost all single-level models 
that can be estimated by other SEM programs. Unlike LISREL or EQS, Mplus 
version 7.33 is mostly syntax-driven and does not produce model diagrams. 
Users can interact with the Mplus Base program through a language generator 
wizard, which prompts users to enter data information and select the estimation 
and output options. Mplus then converts the information into its program-
specific syntax. However, users have to supply the model specification in 
Mplus language themselves. 
Mplus Base also offers a robust option for non-normal data and a special full-
information maximum likelihood estimation method for missing data (see 
footnote 4). With the add-on modules, Mplus can analyze multilevel models 
and models with latent categorical variables, such as latent class and latent 
profile analysis. The modelling of latent categorical variables in Mplus is so far 
unrivalled by other programs. The official web site of Mplus 
(http://www.statmodel.com) offers a comprehensive list of resources including 


--- Page 99 ---
 
 
•  
Quantitative Methods-II 
100 
basic features of the program, illustrative examples, online training courses, 
and a discussion forum for users. 
17.12.4 Amos 
Amos (Analysis of Moment Structure) version 22 is distributed with IBM 
SPSS. It has two components: Amos Graphics and Amos Basic. Similar to the 
LISREL Path Diagram and SIMPLIS syntax, respectively, Amos Graphics 
permits the specification of models by diagram drawing whereas Amos Basic 
allows the specification from equation statements. A notable feature of Amos is 
its capability for producing bootstrapped standard error estimates and 
confidence intervals for parameter estimates. 
An alternative full-information maximum likelihood estimation method for 
missing data is also available in Amos. The program is available at 
http://www.smallwaters.com or http://www.spss.com/amos/. 
17.12.5 Mx 
Mx (Matrix) version 6 is a free program downloadable from 
http://www.vcu.edu/mx/
. The Mx Graph version is for Microsoft Windows 
users. Users can provide model and data information through the Mx 
programming language. Alternatively, models can be drawn in the drawing 
editor of the Mx Graph version and submitted for analysis. Mx Graph can 
calculate confidence intervals and statistical power for parameter estimates. 
Like Amos and Mplus, a special form of full-information maximum likelihood 
estimation is available for missing data in Mx. 
17.12.6 Others 
In addition to SPSS, several other general statistical software packages offer 
built-in routines or procedures that are designed for SEM analyses. They 
include the CALIS (covariance analysis and linear structural equations) 
procedure of SAS (SAS Institute Inc., 2000; http://www.sas.com/
), the 
RAMONA (Reticular Action Model Or Near Approximation) module of 
SYSTAT (Systat Software, Inc., 2002;http://www.systat.com/), and SEPATH 
(structural equation modeling and path analysis) of Statistica (StatSoft, 
Inc.,2003; http://www.statsoft.com/products/advanced.html
). 
17.13 ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF 
SEM 
17.13.1 Advantages of SEM 
1) SEM allows researcher to identify direct and indirect effects. Direct effects 
are principally the relationship between a dependent variable we are 
interested in explaining and an independent variable we think is causing or 
related to the dependent variable. Thus this establishes links directly from a 
cause to an effect. An indirect effect occurs when one variable goes through 
another variable on the way to some dependent or independent variable. 
2) It is possible to have multiple indicators of a concept. With multiple 
regression analysis we only evaluate the effect of individual independent 
variables on the dependent variable.  It creates farily a simple path model 
