--- Page 100 ---
 
 
•  
Structural Equation 
Modeling 
101 
-II while SEM allows for the estimation of the combined effects of 
independent variable into concepts/ construct. 
3) SEM includes measurement error into the model. A problem for path 
analyses using regression as its underlying analysis not adequately control 
for measurement error.  SEM analyses do account for measurement error, 
therefore providing a better understanding of how good the theoretical 
model predicts actual behaviour. 
17.13.2 Disadvantages of SEM  
1) Most of the procedures that have been suggested involve nonstandard and 
complex model specifications that are challenging for the average user and 
thus susceptible to error. Indeed, errors have even been noted in the 
specifications developed by SEM specialists. 
2) Because products of normally distributed observed and latent variables are 
themselves not normally distributed, standard errors and estimates of fit 
might not be accurate. This problem will be more severe to the extent that 
the latent exogenous variables used to form the product term are highly 
correlated. 
3)  If the latent variables that denote main effects are not normally distributed, 
the parameter estimates yielded by several procedures are not consistent.  
4) Most of the methods proposed in the literature are applicable to a restricted 
class of measurement models.  
5) Although a number of alternative procedures and options have been 
proposed, the selection of an optimal approach is made difficult by the 
absence of any one study or set of studies that compares all the viable 
alternatives that have been proposed to date under a variety of conditions. 
6)  Some of the more promising approaches are not easily available in 
conventional SEM software. 
17.14 LET US SUM UP  
SEM techniques are considered today to be a major component of applied 
multivariate statistical analysis and are used by education researchers, 
economists, marketing researchers, medical researchers, and variety of other 
social and behavioural scientists. SEM is a collection of statistical techniques 
that allow a set of relations between one or more independent variables(IVs), 
and one or more dependent variables (DVs). SEM is an attempt to model 
causal relations between variables by including all variables that are known to 
have some involvement in the process of interest. It can be viewed as a 
combination of factor analysis and regression or path analysis. Structural 
equation modeling (SEM) uses various types of models to depict relationships 
among observed variables, with the same basic goal of providing a quantitative 
test of a theoretical model hypothesized by the researcher. Two goals in SEM 
are (1) to understand the patterns of correlation/covariance among a set of 
variables and (2) to explain as much of their variance as possible with the 
model specified. 


--- Page 101 ---
 
 
•  
Quantitative Methods-II 
102 
To discuss the history of structural equation modeling, it is better to explain the 
chronological order of following four models : regression, path, confirmatory 
factor, and structural equation models.  
One of the easiest ways to communicate a structural equation model is to draw 
a diagram of it, referred to as path diagram, using special graphical notation. A 
path diagram is a form of graphical representation of a model under 
consideration. Such a diagram is equivalent to a set of equations defining a 
model (in addition to distributional and related assumptions), and is typically 
used as an alternative way of presenting a model pictorially. Path diagrams not 
only enhance the understanding of structural equation models and their 
communication among researchers with various backgrounds, but also 
substantially contribute to the creation of correct command files to fit and test 
models with specialized programs. Five steps are involed in SEM:  Initial 
model conceptualization, Model estimation, Data-model fit assessment,    
Potential model modification and Reporting the Results. Most SEM analyses 
are conducted using one of the specialized SEM software programs. These 
include LISREL, EQS, Mplus, Amos and Mx. The SEM has certain advantages 
and disadvantages also. 
17.15 KEY WORDS  
SEM : Collection of statistical techniques that allow a set 
of relations between one or more independent 
variables (IVs), and one or more dependent 
variables (DVs). 
Path Diagrams : Pictorial representation of a model. 
Observed variables : Variables that are directly measured. 
Unobserved 
variable 
: Latent variable in terms of multiple indicators that 
are in common with each other. 
Residual or error 
terms 
: Can be associated with either observed variables or 
factors specified as outcome (dependent) variables. 
Measurement 
model 
: The part of the model that relates the measured 
variables to the factors. 
ξ (ksi) : Latent construct associated with observed x i 
indicators.  
η (eta) : Latent construct associated with observed y i 
indicators. 
δ (delta) : Error term associated with observed xi indicators. 
ε (epsilon) : Error term associated with observed x i, y i 
indicators. 
ζ (zeta) : Error term associated with the formative construct. 
Λij : Factor loading in the i-th observed indicator that is 
explained by the j-th latent construct. 
Γij : Weight in the i-th observed indicator that is 
explained by the j-th latent construct. 


--- Page 102 ---
 
 
•  
Structural Equation 
Modeling 
103 
-II Reflective indicator : The construct is the cause of the observed 
measures, so a variation in the construct leads to a 
variation in all its measures. 
Formative or 
causal indicator 
: The direction of causality goes from the indicators 
(measures) to the construct and the error term is 
estimated at the construct level. 
Model specification : Involves using all available relevant theory, 
research,  and information to construct the 
theoretical model. 
Model 
identification 
: A model is said to be identified if there is a unique 
numerical solution for each of the parameters in the 
model. 
Underidentified : If one or more parameters cannot solved uniquely 
on the basis of the covariance matrix S (more 
unknown parameters than equations). 
Just-identified : There is just enough information in the covariance 
matrix S to solve the parameters of the model 
(equally number of equations as unknown 
parameters). 
Over-identified : More than one way to estimate the unknown 
parameters (more equations than unknowns). 
Model estimation : Minimize the difference between the structured and 
unstructured estimated population covariance 
matrices. 
Model evaluation : Assess the fit between observed data and the 
hypothesized model ideally operationalized as an 
evaluation of the degree of discrepancy between the 
true population covariance matrix and that implied 
by the model’s structural and non structural 
parameters. 
Model modification : Respecifying the model based on more relevant 
theory. 
Nested models : Models that are subsets of one another. 
17.16 REFERENCES  
Anderson, J.C., & Gerbing, D.W. (1988). Structural Equation Modeling in 
Practice: A Review and Recommended Two-Step approach. Psychological 
Bulletin, 103(3), 411-423. 
Bentler, P.M. (1990). Comparative fit indexes in structural models. Psychology 
Bulletin, 107, 256–259. 
Bentler, P.M. (2001). EQS 6 structural equations program manual . 
Encino,CA: Multivariate Software. 
Bentler, P. M., & Dijkstra, T. (1985). Efficient estimation via linearization 
instructural models. In P. R. Krishnaiah (Ed.), Multivariate analysis 6 (pp.9–
42). Amsterdam: North-Holland. 


--- Page 103 ---
 
 
•  
Quantitative Methods-II 
104 
Bentler, P. M., & Raykov, T. (2000). On measures of explained variance 
innonrecursive structural equation models. Journal of Applied Psychology, 85, 
125–131. 
Bentler, P. M., &Weeks, D. G. (1980). Linear structural equation with latent 
variables. Psychometrika, 45, 289–308. 
Bentler, P. M., & Yuan, K.-H. (1999). Structural equation modeling withsmall 
samples: Test statistics. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 34,181–197. 
Fox, J. (2006). Structural equation modelling with the sem package  in R. 
Structural equation modelling, 13(3), 465-486.  
Hu, L., & Bentler, P.M. (1998). Fit indices in covariance structural equation 
modeling: Sensitivity to underparameterized model misspecification. 
Psychological Methods, 3, 424–453. 
Hu, L., &Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cut off criteria for fit indexes in covariance 
structure analysis: Conventional criteria versus new alternatives . Structural 
Equation Modeling, 6, 1–55. 
Kline RB. (1998). Principles and Practice of Structural Equation Modeling. 
New York: Guilford 
Lei, P., & Wu, Q. (2007). Introduction to Structural Equation Modeling: Issues 
and Practical Considerations . Instructional topics in educational 
measurement, fall, 33-43. 
Paxton, P., Curran, P.J., Bollen K.A., Kirby, J.,Chen, F.(2001). Monte carlo 
experiments: design And implementation. Structural Equation  
Modeling8:288–312 
Satorra, A. (2000). Scaled and adjusted restricted tests in multi-sample 
analysisof moment structures . In D. D. H. Heijmans, D. S. G. Pollock, & 
A.Satorra (Eds.), Innovations in multivariate statistical analysis: Afestschrift 
for Heinz Neudecker (pp. 233–247). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer 
Academic. 
Satorra, A., & Bentler, P. M. (1988). Scaling corrections for chi-square 
statistics in covariance structure analysis . Proceedings of the American 
Statistical Association, 308–313. 
Satorra, A., &Bentler, P. M. (1994). Corrections to test statistics and standard 
errors in covariance structure analysis . In A. von Eye & C. C. Clogg (Eds.), 
Latent variables analysis: Applications for developmental research (pp. 399–
419). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Satorra, A., &Bentler, P. M. (2001). A scaled difference chi-square test 
statisticfor moment structure analysis. Psychometrika, 66, 507–514. 
Tomarken, A. J., & Waller, N. G. (2005). Structural equation modeling: 
strengths, limitations, and misconceptions . Annual review of clinical 
psychology, 1, 31-65. 
Ullman, J. B., (2006). Structural Equation Modeling: Reviewing the Basics and 
Moving Forward. Journal of personality assessment, 87(1), 35–50. 
Valluzi, J.L., Larson, S.L., Miller, G.E. (2003). Indications and Limitations of 
Structural Equation Modeling in Complex Surveys: Implications for an 
Application in the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) . Joint Statistical 
Meetings - Section on Survey Research Methods. 
