--- Page 80 ---
 
 
•  
Structural Equation 
Modeling 
81 
-II 1) The relationship between the coefficients and the error term must be linear. 
2) The residuals must have a mean zero, be independent, be normally 
distributed, and have variances that are uniform across the variable. 
3) Variables in SEM should be continuous, interval level data. This means 
SEM is not appropriate for censored data. 
4) No specification error. If necessary variables are omitted or unnecessary 
variables are included in the model, there will be measurement error and 
the measurement model will not be accurate. Variables included in the 
model must have acceptable level of kurtosis. 
17.5 SIMILARITIES BETWEEN TRADITIONAL 
STATISTICAL METHODS AND SEM 
SEM is similar to traditional methods like correlation, regression and analysis 
of variance in many ways. First, both traditional methods and SEM are based 
on linear statistical models. Second, statistical tests associated with both 
methods are valid if certain assumptions are met. Traditional methods assume a 
normal distribution and SEM assumes multivariate normality. Third, neither 
approach offers a test of causality. 
17.6 DIFFERENCES BETWEEN TRADITIONAL 
METHODS AND SEM  
Traditional approaches differ from the SEM approach in several areas. First, 
SEM is a highly flexible and comprehensive methodology. This methodology 
is appropriate for investigating achievement, economic trends, health issues, 
family and peer dynamics, self-concept, exercise, self-efficacy, depression, 
psychotherapy, and other phenomenon. 
Second, traditional methods specify a default model whereas SEM requires 
formal specification of a model to be estimated and tested. SEM offers no 
default model and places few limitations on what types of relations can be 
specified. SEM model specification requires researchers to support hypothesis 
with theory or research and specify relations a priori. 
Third, SEM is a multivariate technique incorporating observed (measured) and 
unobserved variables (latent constructs) while traditional techniques analyze 
only measured variables. Multiple, related equations are solved simultaneously 
to determine parameter estimates with SEM methodology. 
Fourth, SEM allows researchers to recognize the imperfect nature of their 
measures. SEM explicitly specifies error while traditional methods assume that 
measurement occurs without error. 
Fifth, traditional analysis provides straightforward significance tests to 
determine group differences, relationships between variables, or the amount of 
variance explained. SEM provides no straightforward tests to determine model 
fit. Instead, the best strategy for evaluating model fit is to examine multiple 
tests (e.g., chi-square, Comparative Fit Index (CFI), Bentler-Bonett Non-
normed Fit Index (NNFI), Root Mean Squared Error of Approximation 
(RMSEA)). 


--- Page 81 ---
 
 
•  
Quantitative Methods-II 
82 
Sixth, SEM resolves problems of multicollinearity. Multiple measures are 
required to describe a latent construct (unobserved variable). Multicollinearity 
cannot occur because unobserved variables represent distinct latent constructs.  
Finally, a graphical language provides a convenient and powerful way to 
present complex relationships in SEM. Model specification involves 
formulating statements about a set of variables. A diagram, a pictorial 
representation of a model, is transformed into a set of equations. The set of 
equations are solved simultaneously to test model fit and estimate parameters. 
17.7 CONCEPTS AND TERMINOLOGY USED IN 
SEM 
The key elements of essentially all structural equation models are their 
parameters (often referred to as model parameters or unknown parameters). 
Model parameters reflect those aspects of a model that are typically unknown 
to the researcher, at least at the beginning of the analyses, yet are of potential 
interest to him or her.  
Parameter is a generic term referring to a characteristic of a population, such 
as mean or variance on a given variable, which is of relevance in a particular 
study. 
A model is a statistical statement about the relations among variables. 
A path diagram is a pictorial representation of a model. 
A measured variable (MV) is a variables that is directly measured whereas a 
latent variable (LV) is a construct that is not directly or exactly measured. 
A latent variable (LV) could be defined as whatever its multiple indicators 
have in common with each other. LVs defined in this way are equivalent to 
common factors in factor analysis and can be viewed as being free from error 
of measurement. 
Direct effect is a directional relation between two variables, e.g., independent 
and dependent variables. 
Indirect effect is the effect of an independent variable on a dependent variable 
through one or more intervening or mediating variables. 
Specification is formulating a statement about a set of parameters and stating a 
model. 
Fit indices indicate the degree to which a pattern of fixed and free parameters 
specified in the model is consistent with the pattern of variances and 
covariances from a set of observed data. Examples of fit indices are chi-square, 
CFI, NNFI, and RMSEA. 
Components of a general structural equation model are the measurement model 
and the structural model.  
The measurement model prescribes latent variables, e.g., confirmatory factor 
analysis. The structural model prescribes relations between latent variables 
and observed variables that are not indicators of latent variables. 
Identification involves the study of conditions to obtain a single, unique 
solution for each and every free parameter specified in the model from the 
observed data.  


--- Page 82 ---
 
 
•  
Structural Equation 
Modeling 
83 
-II The purpose of estimation is to obtain numerical values for the unknown (free) 
parameters. 
Exogenous variable—Independent variables not presumed to be caused by 
variables in the model. 
Endogenous variables— variables presumed to be caused by other variables in 
the model. 
Recursive models assume that all causal effects are represented as 
unidirectional and no disturbance correlations among endogenous variables 
with direct effects between them. 
Non-recursive models are those with feedback loops Model Specification—
Formally stating a model via statements about a set of parameters. 
Model Identification—Can a single unique value for each and every free 
parameter be obtained from the observed data. 
Evaluation of Fit—Assessment of the extent to which the overall model fits or 
provides a reasonable estimate of the observed data. 
Model Modification—adjusting a specified and estimated model by freeing or 
fixing new parameters. 
17.7.1 Path Diagrams 
One of the easiest ways to communicate a structural equation model is to draw 
a diagram of it, referred to as path diagram, using special graphical notation. A 
path diagram is a form of graphical representation of a model under 
consideration. Such a diagram is equivalent to a set of equations defining a 
model (in addition to distributional and related assumptions), and is typically 
used as an alternative way of presenting a model pictorially. Path diagrams not 
only enhance the understanding of structural equation models and their 
communication among researchers with various backgrounds, but also 
substantially contribute to the creation of correct command files to fit and test 
models with specialized programs.  
For constructing the path diagrams, widely accepted set of conventions for the 
graphical display of structural equation models can be used. According to these 
conventions, unobserved variables, also known as latent variables or constructs 
are represented as circles or ovals and measured variables also known as 
observed variables, indicators or manifest variables are represented by squares 
or rectangles. Lines indicate relations between variables; lack of a line 
connecting variables implies that no direct relationship has been hypothesized. 
Lines have either one or two arrows. A line with one arrow represents a 
hypothesized direct relationship between two variables. The variable with the 
arrow pointing to it is the DV. A line with an arrow at both ends indicates a 
covariance between the two variables with no implied direction of effect. 
Latent variables in SEM generally correspond to hypothetical constructs or 
factors, which are explanatory variables, supposed to reflect a range that is not 
directly observable. An example is the construct of intelligence. There is no 
single, definitive measure of intelligence. Instead, researchers use different 
types of observed variables, such as tasks of verbal reasoning or memory 
capacity, to assess various facets of intelligence. Latent variables in SEM can 
represent a wide range of phenomena. For example, constructs about attributes 
of people (e.g., intelligence, neuroticism), higher-level units of analysis (e.g., 


--- Page 83 ---
 
 
•  
Quantitative Methods-II 
84 
groups, geographic regions), or measures, such as method effects (e.g., self-
report, observational), can all be represented as latent variables in SEM. An 
observed variable used as an indirect measure of a construct is referred to as an 
indicator. The explicit distinction between factors and indicators in SEM 
allows one to test a wide variety of hypotheses about measurement. 
 
 
1.7.2  Classical SEM Notations 
These are the c “classical” SEM notation that needs some consideration. ξ (ksi) 
represents a latent construct associated with observed xi indicators, η (eta) 
stands for a latent construct associated with observed yi indicators, the error 
terms δ (delta) and ε (epsilon) are associated with observed xi and yi indicators, 
respectively. ζ (zeta) is the error term associated with the formative construct. 
λij represents factor loading in the i-th observed indicator that is explained by 


--- Page 84 ---
 
 
•  
Structural Equation 
Modeling 
85 
-II the j-th latent construct. γij represents weight in the i-th observed indicator that 
is explained by the j-th latent construct. 
Table 17.1: Summary of abbreviations and descriptions used in the SEM study 
Symbol Name Description 
ξ ksi  A latent construct associated with observed x i indicators 
η eta A latent construct associated with observed y i indicators 
δi delta The error term associated with observed x i indicators 
εi epsilon The error term associated with observed y i indicators 
ζ zeta The error term associated with formative construct 
λij lambda Factor loading in the i-th observed indicator that is explained by the  
j-th latent construct 
γij gamma Weight in the i-th observed indicator that is explained by the j-th latent 
construct 
xi  An indicator associated with exogenous construct, i.e. vector of 
observed exogenous variable 
yi  An indicator associated with endogenous construct, i.e. vector of 
observed endogenous variable. 
17.8  SEM MODELS SPEPECIFICATION  
There are three diffeerent SEM models based on different specifications. 
17.8.1   Based on Reflective Indicators 
The following figure depicts the “classical” SEM case where the model is 
specified in the reflective mode known as Type A model specification. The 
case illustrates a path diagram between the two latent constructs ( ξ – 
exogenous and η – endogenous), with three indicators per construct (xi and yi). 
This case can be represented by equations 1 and 2:  
1)  xi = λijξ + δi 
2)  yi = λijη + εi 
 
This specification assumes that the error term is unrelated to the latent variable 
COV(η, εi) = 0, and independent COV(εi, εj) = 0, for i ≠ j and expected. 
 
Reflective indicators 
17.8.2   Based on Formative Indicators 
Type B model specification, is known as a formative (Fornell&Bookstein 
1982; cf. Edwards 2001) or causal indicator (Bollen and Lennox 1991), 


--- Page 85 ---
 
 
•  
Quantitative Methods-II 
86 
because the direction of causality goes from the indicators (measures) to the 
construct and the error term is estimated  at the construct level. This type of 
model specification can be represented by equations 3 and 4:  
3)  ξ = γijxi + ζ   
4)  η = γijyi + ζ  
 
 
 
Formative Indicators 
This specification assumes that the indicators and error term are not related, i.e. 
COV(yi, ζ) = 0, and E( ζ) = 0 . Formative indicators were introduced for the 
first time by Curtis and Jackson (1962) and extended by Blalock (1964). This 
type of model specification assumes that the indicators have an influence on (or 
that they cause) a latent construct. In other words, the indicators as a group 
“jointly determine the conceptual and empirical meaning of the construct.  
The type B model specification would give better explanatory power, in 
comparison to the type A model specification, if the goal is the explanation of 
unobserved variance in the constructs. A model is identified if model parameters 
have only one group of values that create the covariance matrix. In order to resolve 
the problem of indeterminacy that is related to the construct-level error term, the 
formative-indicator construct must be associated with unrelated reflective 
constructs. This can be achieved if the formative construct emits paths to: 
i) at least two unrelated reflective indicators; 
ii) at least two unrelated reflective constructs; and 
iii) one reflective indicator that is associated with a formative construct and 
one reflective construct. 
From an empirical point of view, the latent construct captures  
i) the common variance among indicators in the type A model specification; and  
ii) the total variance among its indicators in the type B model specification, 
covering the whole conceptual domain as an entity (cf. Cenfetelli & 
Bassellier 2009; MacKenzie et al. 2005). 
Reflective indicators are expected to be interchangeable and have a common 
theme. Interchangeability, in the reflective context, means that omission of an 
indicator will not alter the meaning of the construct. In other words, reflective 
measures should be unidimensional and they should represent the common theme 
of the construct. Formative indicators are not expected to be interchangeable, 
because each measure describes a different aspect of the construct’s common 
theme and dropping an indicator will influence the essence of the latent 
   x1                         x2                      x3    y1                         y2                      y3 


--- Page 86 ---
 
 
•  
Structural Equation 
Modeling 
87 
-II variable. The behavior of measures of the construct with regards to the same 
antecedents and consequences is an important criterion for the assessment of 
the construct-indicator relationship. Reflective indicators are interchangeable, 
which means that measures are affected by the construct, and they must have 
the same antecedents and consequences. The formative constructs are affected by 
the measures, thus are not necessarily interchangeable, and each measure can 
represent a different theme. For the formative indicators, it is not necessary to 
have the same antecedents and consequences.  
Internal consistency is implied in the reflective indicators because correlation 
between variables is must. High correlations among the reflective indicators are 
essential, because they represent the same underlying theoretical concept. This 
means that all of the items are measuring the same phenomenon within the 
latent construct. On the contrary, within the formative indicators, internal 
consistency is not implied because the researcher does not expect high 
correlations among the measures. Because formative measures are not required 
to be correlated, validity of construct should not be assessed by internal 
consistency and reliability as with the reflective measures, but with other 
means such as nomological and/or criterion-related validity. 
17.8.3    Based on both Reflective and Formative Indicators 
The researcher can create a model that uses both formative and reflective 
indicators. It is possible for a structural model to have one type of latent 
construct at the first-order (latent construct) level and a different type of latent 
construct at the second-order level (Fornell&Bookstein 1982; MacKenzie et al. 
2005; Diamantopoulos & Siguaw 2006; Wetzels et al. 2009). In other words, 
the researcher can combine different latent constructs to form a hybrid model 
(Edwards & Bagozzi 2000; McDonald 1996; Tenenhaus et al. 2005). 
Development of this model type depends on the underlying causality between 
the constructs and indicators, as well as the nature of the theoretical concept. 
The researcher should model exogenous constructs in the formative mode and 
all endogenous constructs in the reflective mode, 
i) if one intends to explain variance in the unobservable constructs (Fornell 
& Bookstein 1982; cf. Wetzels et al. 2009); and 
ii) in case of weak theoretical background (Wold 1980). 
Conducting a VBSEM approach in this model, using a PLS algorithm, is equal 
to redundancy analysis (Fornell et al. 1988; cf. Chin 1998b), because the mean 
variance in the endogenous construct is predicted by the linear outputs of the 
exogenous constructs. 
 


--- Page 87 ---
 
 
•  
Quantitative Methods-II 
88 
17.9 ISSUES IN SEM TECHNIQUE  
17.9.1    Sample Size and Power  
SEM is based on covariance. Covariance is less stable when estimated from 
small samples. Therefore, large sample sizes are needed for SEM analyses. 
Parameter estimates and chi-square tests of fit are also very sensitive to sample 
size; therefore, SEM is a large sample technique. However, it may be possible 
to estimate small models with fewer participants if variables are highly reliable. 
In addition, although SEM is a large sample technique and test statistics are 
affected by small samples, promising work has been done by Bentler and Yuan 
(1999) who developed test statistics for small samples sizes. 
17.9.2    Missing Data 
Problems of missing data are repeatedly exaggerated in SEM due to the large 
number of measured variables employed. The researcher who relies on using 
complete cases only is often left with an inadequate number of complete cases 
to estimate a model. Therefore missing data attribution is particularly important 
in many SEM models. When there is evidence that the data are missing at 
random (MAR; missing data on a variable may depend on other variables in 
the dataset but the missing data does not depend on the variable itself) or 
missing completely at random  (MCAR; missing data is unrelated to the 
variable missing data or the variables in the dataset), the EM (expectation 
maximization) algorithm to obtain maximum likelihood  (ML) estimates, is 
appropriate method of imputing missing data. Some of the software packages 
now include procedures for estimating missing data, including the EM algorithm. 
EQS 6.1 (Bentler, 2004) produces the EMbased maximum likelihood solution 
automatically, based on the Jamshidian–Bentler (Jamshidian & Bentler, 1999) 
computations. 
LISREL and AMOS also produce EM-based maximum likelihood estimates. 
but, if the data are not normally distributed, maximum likelihood test 
statistics— including those based on the EM algorithm—may be quite 
inaccurate.Multiple imputationis is another option for treatment of missing data. 
17.9.2    Multivariate Normality and Outliers 
The most commonly employed techniques for estimating models assume 
multivariate normality in SEM. It is always useful to examine both univariate 
and multivariate normality indexes to assess normality. Univariate distributions 
can be examined for outliers and skewness and kurtosis. Multivariate 
distributions are examined for normality and multivariate outliers. Multivariate 
normality can be evaluated through the use of Mardia’s (1970) coefficient and 
multivariate outliers can be evaluated through evaluation of Mahalanobis 
distance. Mardia’s (1970) coefficient evaluates multivariate normality through 
evaluation of multivariate kurtosis. Mardia’s coefficient can be converted to a 
normalized score (equivalent to az score), often normalized coefficients greater 
than 3.00 are indicative of non-normality. Mahalanobis distance is the distance 
between a case and the centroid (the multivariate mean with that data point 
removed). Mahalanobis distance is distributed as a chi-square with degrees of 
freedom equal to the number of measured variables used to calculate the 
centroid. Therefore, a multivariate outlier can be defined as a case that is 
associated with a Mahalanobis distance greater than a critical distance specified 
typically by a p < .001.  


--- Page 88 ---
 
 
•  
Structural Equation 
Modeling 
89 
-II 17.10 STEPS IN SEM  
Many contemporary treatments introduce SEM not just as a statistical 
technique but as a process involving several stages:  
1) Model specification,  
2) Model estimation,  
3) Data-model fit assessment, and  
4)  Potential model modification, 
5) Reporting the Results. 
17.10.1   Initial Model Specification 
The first step in SEM is model conceptualization or specification. This stage 
consists of gaining knowledge of the underlying theory on which the particular 
model will be based. This stage begins with stating the hypothesis in both 
diagrams and equation form then statistically identifying the model and then 
evaluating the statistical assumptions that underlie the model.  
In this phase the model is specified through a diagram. The relations in the 
diagram are directly translated into equations and the model is then estimated. 
One method of model specification is the Bentler–Weeks method (Bentler& 
Weeks, 1980). In this method every variable in the model, latent or measured, 
is either an IV or a DV. The parameters to be estimated are the (a) regression 
coefficients, and (b) the variances and the covariances of the independent 
variables in the model (Bentler, 2001). In the Bentler–Weeks model only 
independent variables have variances and covariances as parameters of the 
model. 
A normally tricky and often confusing topic in SEM is identification. In SEM, 
a model is specified, parameters (variances and covariances of IVs and 
regression coefficients) for the model are estimated using sample data, and the 
parameters are used to produce the estimated population covariance matrix. 
However, only models that are identified can be estimated. A model is said to 
be identified if there is a unique numerical solution for each of the parameters 
in the model. The first step consists of counting the number of data points and 
the number of parameters that we want to estimate. The data in SEM are the 
variances and covariances in the sample covariance matrix. The number of data 
points is the number of non redundant sample variances and covariances, 
where p equals the number of measured variables. The number of parameters is 
established by adding together the number of regression coefficients, variances, 
and covariances that are to be estimated. There should be more data points than 
parameters to be estimated for the estimation of model. 
Hypothesized models are said to be over identified if there are more data than 
parameters to be estimated. The model is said to be just identified if, there are 
the same numbers of data points as parameters to be estimated. In this case, the 
estimated parameters perfectly reproduce the sample covariance matrix and the 
chi-square test statistic and degrees of freedom are equal to zero, hypotheses 
about the adequacy of the model cannot be tested. However, hypotheses about 
specific paths in the model can be tested. The model is said to be under 
identified if there are fewer data points than parameters to be estimated, and 
parameters cannot be estimated. The number of parameters needs to be reduced 


--- Page 89 ---
 
 
•  
Quantitative Methods-II 
90 
by fixing, constraining, or deleting some of them. A parameter may be fixed by 
setting it to a specific value or constrained by setting the parameter equal to 
another parameter. Examining the measurement portion of the model is the 
second step in determining model identifiability. The measurement part of the 
model deals with the relationship between the measured indicators and the 
factors. 
Factors, are hypothetical constructs and consist of common variance, as such 
they have no intrinsic scale and therefore need to be scaled. Measured variables 
have scales, for example, income may be measured in dollars or weight in 
pounds. To establish the scale of a factor, the variance for the factor is fixed to 
1.00, or the regression coefficient from the factor to one of the measured 
variables is fixed to 1.00. Fixing the regression coefficient to 1 gives the factor 
the same variance as the common variance portion of the measured variable. If 
the factor is an IV, either alternative can be applied. If the factor is a DV the 
regression coefficient is set to 1.00. Not setting the scale of a latent variable is 
easily the most common error made when first identifying a model. Next, to 
establish the identifiability of the measurement portion of the model the 
number of factors and measured variables are examined. If there is only one 
factor, the model may be identified if the factor has at least three indicators 
with nonzero loading and the errors (residuals) are uncorrelated with one 
another. If there are two or more factors, again consider the number of 
indicators for each factor. 
If each factor has three or more indicators, the model may be identified if errors 
associated with the indicators are not correlated, each indicator loads on only 
one factor and the factors are allowed to co-vary. If there are only two 
indicators for a factor, the model may be identified if there are no correlated 
errors, each indicator loads on only one factor, and none of the covariances 
among factors is equal to zero. 
17.10.2   Model Estimation 
The next step in SEM is to evaluate and estimate population parameters. The 
purpose of estimation is to minimize the difference between the structured and 
unstructured estimated population covariance matrices.  
F = (s – s(Q))W(s – s(Q)),  
To accomplish this goal a function, F, is minimized where, s is the vector of 
data (the observed sample covariance matrix stacked into a vector); s is the 
vector of the estimated population covariance matrix (again, stacked into a 
vector) and(Q) indicates that s is derived from the parameters (the regression 
coefficients, variances and covariances) of the model. W is the matrix that 
weights the squared differences between the sample and estimated population 
covariance matrix. 
In EFA the observed and reproduced correlation matrices are compared. This 
idea is extended in SEM to include a statistical test of the differences between 
the estimated structured and unstructured population covariance matrices. If the 
weight matrix, W, is chosen correctly, at the minimum with the optimal, F 
multiplied by (N – 1) yields a chi-square test statistic. 
There are many different estimation techniques in SEM, these techniques vary 
by the choice of W.  
