--- Page 70 ---
 
 
 
Correspondence 
Analysis 
71 
-II 16.9 LET US SUM UP 
Correspondence analysis is a data analytic technique that helps to detect 
structural relationships among the categorized variables. It allows to define the 
nature and structure of the relationship between qualitative variables measured 
in nominal and ordinal scales. This technique can be considered a special case 
of principal component analysis of the rows and columns of a table especially 
applicable to a cross tabulation. Determination of the correspondence matrix, 
row and column profiles and masses, calculation of the distances between the 
rows and columns, presentation of row and column profiles, determination of 
the average row and column profiles, reducing the dimension of spaces, and 
plotting the correspondence map in terms of biplots are the various steps 
involved in correspondence analysis technique. 
Correspondence analysis facilitates the visualization of the associations 
between the rows and columns of a contingency table. This technique can be 
applied across the desciplines ranging from social sciences (including 
economics, psychology etc.) to health sciences, biometry etc. It is a versatile 
method of data analysis in the situations where exploratory or more indepth 
data analysis of categorical data is required. 
By virtue of being primarily a graphical technique designed to represent 
associations in a low-dimensional space, correspondence analysis can be 
regarded as a scaling method.This technique is also viewed as a complement to 
other methods such as biplots and multidimensional scaling. Correspondence 
analysis also has links to principal component analysis and canonical 
correlation analysis.  
16.10 KEY WORDS 
Correspondence 
Analysis 
: It is a multivariate statistical technique by Hirschfeld and 
later developed by Jean-Paul Benzecri. It is conceptually 
similar to principal component analysis, but applies to 
categorical rather than continuous data. In a similar 
manner to principal component analysis, it provides a 
means of displaying or summarizing a set of data in 
two-dimensional graphical form. 
Inertia :
 The inertia of the whole table is a function of the Chi-
square statistic (/g2031/g2870/g4667.  
If  /g2031/g2870/g3404∑ ∑
/g3435/g3016/g3284/g3285/g2879/g3006/g3284/g3285/g3439/g3118
/g3006/g3284/g3285/g3037 /g3036 
w
here /g1841/g3036/g3037is the count of row ia nd column j of the 
contingency table, /g1831/g3036/g3037is the expected value  under the 
a
ssumption of row-by-column independence, and N is 
the total table count, then the total inertia of the table is 
given by 
Total Inertia = 
/g3102/g3118
/g3041 
The inertia value reported is the proportion of the total 
inertia that is due to this profile. Another way to 
interpret the inertia is that it is the weighted average of 


--- Page 71 ---
 
 
 
Quantitative Methods-II 
72 
the Chi-square distances between the row profiles and 
their average profile. 
Centroid :  The (weighted) mean of a multivariate data set which 
can be represented by a vector. For many ordination 
techniques, the centroid is a vector of zeros (that is, the 
scores are centered and standardized). In a direct 
gradient analysis, a categorical variable is often best 
represented by a centroid in the ordination diagram. 
Categorical 
Variable 
:
 A variable that is represented by several different types; 
for example: lake/river/stream, farm/pasture/ unmanaged, 
pitfall trap/fence trap/direct sighting. For most multivariate 
analyses, categorical variables must be converted to k-1 
dummy variables (where k = the number of categories). 
Classification :
 The act of putting things in groups. Most commonly in 
community ecology, the “things” are samples or 
communities. Classification can be completely subjective, 
or it can be objective and computer-assisted (even if 
arbitrary). 
Correlation :  A method which determines the strength of the 
relationship between variables, and/or a means to test 
whether the relationship is stronger than expected due to 
the null hypothesis. Usually, we are interested in the 
relationship between two variables, x and y. The 
coefficient of correlation r is one measure of the 
strength of the relationship. 
Correlation 
Coefficient 
:
 Usually abbreviated by r, and a number which reflects 
the strength of the relationship between two variables. It 
varies between -1 (for a perfect negative relationship) to 
+1 (for a perfect positive relationship). If variables are 
standardized to have zero mean and a unit standard 
deviation, then r will also be the slope of the relationship. 
The value r2 is known as the coefficient of determination; 
it varies between 0 and 1. The coefficient of determination 
is loosely interpreted as “the proportion of variance 
in y which can be explained by x”. 
Multiple 
Correspondence 
Analysis(MCA) 
:
 Multiple correspondence analysis applied to the general 
problem of associations among a set of more than two 
categorical variables. We shall see that the generalization 
to more than two variables is neither obvious nor well-
defined. In other areas of multivariate analysis, such as 
regression and log linear modelling, the situation is less 
complicated. The main problem is that the notion of 
association between two categorical variables is already a 
complex concept and there are several ways to generalize 
this concept to more than two variables. 
Singular Value 
Decomposition 
:
 The Singular Value Decomposition is the fundamental 
mathematical result for Correspondence Analysis, as it is 
for other dimension reduction techniques such as principal 
component analysis, canonical correlation analysis etc. 
This matrix decomposition expresses any rectangular 


--- Page 72 ---
 
 
 
Correspondence 
Analysis 
73 
-II matrix as a product of three matrices of simple structure, 
i.e. D/g2928
/g2879/g2869/g2870⁄ PD/g2913
/g2879/g2869/g2870⁄ . The columns of the matrices D/g2928
/g2879/g2869/g2870⁄ and 
D/g2913
/g2879
/g2869 /g2870⁄ are the left and right singular vectors respectively, 
a
nd the positive values of the diagonal of P, in descending 
order are the singular values. The SVD is related to the 
more well-known eigenvalue- eigenvector decomposition 
of a square symmetric matrix. If a generalized form of the 
SVD were defined, where the singular vectors are 
normalized with weighting by the masses, then the CA 
solution can also be easily obtained. 
16.11 SOME USEFUL BOOKS 
1) Greenacre, M. J. (1984); Theory and applications of Correspondence 
analysis, London Academic Press. 
2) Gifi, A. (1990). Nonlinear Multivariate Analysis. Chichester, UK: Wiley. 
3) Johnson R.A., &WichernD. W. (2002); Applied Multivariate Statistical 
Analysis, Pearson Education, Inc. 
4) Manly, B.F.J. (2005), Multivariate Statistical Methods : A Primer, Third 
edition, Chapman and Hall. 
5) Rencher, A.C. (2002), Methods of Multivariate Analysis , Second edition, 
Wiley. 
6) https://onlinecourses.science.psu.edu 
7) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Factor_Analysis 
8) Young, F.W, and R.M Hamer (1987); Multidimensional scaling: History, 
Theory and Applications, Lawrence Associates Publishers. 
9) http://www.unesco.org/webworld/idams/advguide/Chapt6_5.htm 
10) Laura Doey and Jessica Kurta (2011); Correspondence Analysis applied to 
psychological research, Tutorials in Quantitative Methods for Psychology, 
2011, Vol. 7(1), Page 5-14. 
11) Michael S. Lewis-Beck Alan Bryman Tim Futing Liao (Ed.) (2004); The Sage 
Encyclopedia of Social Science Research Methods Vol. 1, Page 203-205. 
16.12 ANSWERS OR HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) See Section 16.4.6 
2) The value of chi square is 219.816 and the value of inertia 0.528. 
16.13 EXERCISES 
1) What is Correspondence Analysis? Why do we use Correspondence Analysis? 
2) What do you understand by multidimensional scaling? How it differ from 
correspondence analysis. 


--- Page 73 ---
 
 
 
Quantitative Methods-II 
74 
3) A sample of 901 individuals was cross classified according to three 
categories of income and four categories of job satisfaction. The results are 
given in the following table: 
Table: Income and Job Satisfaction 
Income Job Satisfaction 
Very               Somewhat           Moderately          Very  
Dissatisfied       Dissatisfied      Satisfied              Satisfied 
< $ 25,000 
< $ 25,000 - $ 50,000 
>$ 50,000 
42                      62                          184                   207 
13                      28                          81                     113 
7                        18                          54                      92 
Perform a correspondence analysis of these data. Also interpret the results. 


--- Page 74 ---
 
 
•  
Structural Equation 
Modeling 
75 
-II 
UNIT 17 STRUCTURAL EQUATION 
MODELING 
 
Structure 
17.0 Objectives 
17.1 Introduction 
17.2  History of  Structural Equation Modelling (SEM) 
17.3 Why do we Conduct Structural Equation Modelling? 
17.4 Assumptions of SEM 
17.5 Similarities between Traditional Statistical Methods and SEM 
17.6 Differences between Traditional Statistical Methods and SEM 
17.7 Concepts and Terminology used in SEM 
  17.7.1 Path Diagrams 
  17.7.2 Classical SEM Notations 
17.8 SEM Models Spepecification 
  17.8.1 Based on Reflective Indicators 
  17.8.2 Based on Formative Indicators 
  17.8.3 Based on on both Reflective and Formative Indicators 
17.9 Issues in SEM Tecnique 
 17.10.1 Sample Size and Power  
 17.10.2 Missing Data  
 17.10.3 Multivariate Normality and Outliers 
17.10 Steps in SEM 
 17.10.1 Initial Model Conceptualization  
 17.10.2 Model Estimation  
 17.10.3 Model Evaluation  
 17.10.4 Model Modification 
 17.10.5 Reporting the Results 
17.11 An Example of SEM 
17.12 Software Programs for SEM 
 17.12.1 LISREL   
 17.12.2 EQS   
 17.12.3 Mplus 
 17.12.4 Amos 
 17.12.5 Mx 
 17.12.6 Others 
17.13 Advantages and Disadvantages of SEM 
 17.13.1 Advantages of SEM 
 17.13.2 Disadvantages of SEM  
17.14 Let Us Sum Up 
17.15 Key Words 
17.16 References 
17.0  OBJECTIVES  
After going through the unit, you will be able to: 
• State the meaning and importance of Structural Equation Modeling (SEM); 
• Describe the basic concepts and terminology of SEM; 
• Explain why do we conduct the SEM; 
 


--- Page 75 ---
 
 
•  
Quantitative Methods-II 
76 
• Discuss the various models of SEM; 
• Learn the steps involved in  SEM; 
• Know the different softwares used in SEM; and 
• Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of SEM. 
17.1 INTRODUCTION  
SEM techniques are considered today to be a major component of applied 
multivariate statistical analysis and are used by education researchers, 
economists, marketing researchers, medical researchers, and variety of other 
social and behavioural scientists.  Although the statistical theory that underlies 
the techniques appeared decades ago, a considerable number of years passed 
before SEM received widespread attention it hold today. There are two reasons 
for the recent attention: (1) the availability of specialized SEM programme and 
(2) publication of several introductory and advanced text books on SEM.  
Structural equation modelling (SEM) does not designate a single statistical 
technique but instead refers to a family of related procedures. SEM is a 
collection of statistical techniques that allow a set of relations between one or 
more independent variables (IVs), either continuous or discrete, and one or 
more dependent variables (DVs), either continuous or discrete, to be examined. 
Both IVs and DVs can be either measured variables (directly observed), or 
latent variables (unobserved, not directly observed).  
 
SEM is an attempt to model causal relations between variables by including all 
variables that are known to have some involvement in the process of interest. It 
can be viewed as a combination of factor analysis and regression or path 


--- Page 76 ---
 
 
•  
Structural Equation 
Modeling 
77 
-II analysis. The interest in SEM is often on theoretical construct, which are 
represented by the latent factors. The relationship between theoretical construct 
are represented by regression or path coefficients between the factors. 
The SEM implies a structure for the covariance between the observed variables 
which provides the alternative names like Covariance structural model. SEM 
provides a very general and convenient framework for statistical analysis that 
includes several traditional multivariate procedure for example, factor analysis, 
regression analysis, and canonical correlation as special case. Structural 
Equation Models are often visualized by a graphical path diagram. The 
statistical model is usually represented in a set of matrix equations. 
Structural equation models, also called simultaneous equation models, refers to 
multi equation systems that include continuous latent variables each 
representing a concept or construct , multiple indicators of a concept or 
construct that may be continuous, ordinal, dichotomous or censored, errors of 
measurement and errors in equations. One may also view it as an interrelated 
system of regression equations where some of the variables (latent or 
observable) have multiple indicators and where measurement error is taken into 
account when estimating relationships. From a different point of view, these 
are factor analysis models in which factor loadings are restricted to zero or 
some other constants, and the researcher allows factors to influence each other, 
directly and indirectly. The most general form of the structural equation model 
includes Analysis of Variance, Analysis of Covariance, Multiple Linear 
Regression, Multivariate Multiple Regression, Recursive and Non-recursive 
Simultaneous Equations, Path Analysis, Confirmatory Factor Analysis and 
many other procedures as special cases.  
Structural equation modeling (SEM) uses various types of models to depict 
relationships among observed variables, with the same basic goal of providing 
a quantitative test of a theoretical model hypothesized by the researcher. More 
specifically, various theoretical models can be tested in SEM that hypothesize 
how sets of variables define constructs and how these constructs are related to 
each other. For example, an educational researcher might hypothesize that a 
student’s home environment influences her later achievement in school. A 
marketing researcher may hypothesize that consumer trust in a corporation 
leads to increased product sales for that corporation. A health care professional 
might believe that a good diet and regular exercise reduce the risk of a heart 
attack. 
In each example, the researcher believes, based on theory and empirical 
research, sets of variables define the constructs that are hypothesized to be 
related in a certain way. The goal of SEM analysis is to determine the extent to 
which the theoretical model is supported by sample data. If the sample data 
support the theoretical model, then more complex theoretical models can be 
hypothesized. If the sample data do not support the theoretical model, then 
either the original model can be modified and tested, or other theoretical 
models need to be developed and tested. Consequently, SEM tests theoretical 
models using the scientific method of hypothesis testing to advance our 
understanding of the complex relationships among constructs. 
SEM has been defined by different researchers in different ways. 
According to Holey (1995) it is a comprehensive statistical approach to testing 
hypotheses about relations among observed and latent variables. 


--- Page 77 ---
 
 
•  
Quantitative Methods-II 
78 
Rigdon, (1998):  SEM is a methodology for representing, estimating, and 
testing a theoretical network of (mostly) linear relations between variables. 
MacCallum & Austin (2000): it tests hypothesized patterns of directional and 
non directional relationships among a set of observed (measured) and 
unobserved (latent) variables.  
So, the term “Structural Equation Model” (SEM) refers to a comprehensive 
statistical methodology for testing and estimating causal relations using a 
combination of cross-sectional statistical data and qualitative causal 
assumptions. Unlike the usual multivariate linear regression model, the 
response variable in one regression equation in a structural equation model may 
appear as a predictor in another equation. Indeed, variables in a structural 
equation model may influence one-another reciprocally, either directly or 
through other variables. 
Two goals in SEM are: 
1)  to understand the patterns of correlation/covariance among a set of 
variables and 
2)  to explain as much of their variance as possible with the model specified 
(Kline, 1998). 
This is the family tree of SEM 
 
 
 


--- Page 78 ---
 
 
•  
Structural Equation 
Modeling 
79 
-II 17.2 HISTORY OF STRUCTURAL EQUATION 
MODELLING (SEM) 
To discuss the history of structural equation modelling, it is better to explain 
the chronological order of following four models: regression, path, 
confirmatory factor, and structural equation models. 
The first model  involves linear regression models that use a correlation 
coefficient and the least squares criterion to compute regression weights. 
Regression models were made possible because Karl Pearson created a formula 
for the correlation coefficient in 1896 that provides an index for the 
relationship between two variables (Pearson, 1938). The regression model 
permits the prediction of dependent observed variable scores (Y scores), given 
a linear weighting of a set of independent observed scores (X scores) that 
minimizes the sum of squared residual error values. Regression analysis 
provides a test of a theoretical model that may be useful for prediction.  
Some years later, Charles Spearman (1904, 1927) used the correlation 
coefficient to determine which items correlated or went together to create the 
factor model. His basic idea was that if a set of items correlated or went 
together, individual responses to the set of items could be summed to yield a 
score that would measure, define, or infer a construct. Spearman was the first 
to use the term factor analysis in defining a two-factor construct for a theory of 
intelligence. D.N. Lawley and L.L. Thurstone in 1940 further developed 
applications of factor models, and proposed instruments (sets of items) that 
yielded observed scores from which constructs could be inferred. The term 
confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) is used today based in part on earlier work 
by Howe (1955), Anderson and Rubin (1956), and Lawley (1958). The CFA 
method was more fully developed by Karl Jöreskog in the 1960s to test 
whether a set of items defined a construct. 
Factor analysis has been used for over 100 years to create measurement 
instruments in many academic disciplines, while today CFA is used to test the 
existence of these theoretical constructs.  
Sewell Wright (1918, 1921, 1934), a biologist, developed the third type of 
model, a path model. Path models use correlation coefficients and regression 
analysis to model more complex relationships among observed variables. The 
first applications of path analysis dealt with models of animal behavior. 
Unfortunately, path analysis was largely overlooked until econometricians 
reconsidered it in the 1950s as a form of simultaneous equation modeling (e.g., 
H. Wold) and sociologists rediscovered it in the 1960s (e.g., O. D. Duncan and 
H. M. Blalock). In many respects, path analysis involves solving a set of 
simultaneous regression equations that theoretically establish the relationship 
among the observed variables in the path model.  
The final model type is structural equation modeling (SEM). SEM models 
essentially combine path models and confirmatory factor models, that is, SEM 
models incorporate both latent and observed variables. The early development 
of SEM models was due to Karl Jöreskog (1969, 1973), Ward Keesling (1972), 
and David Wiley (1973). This approach was initially known as the JKW 
model, but became known as the linear structural relations model (LISREL) 
with the development of the first software program, LISREL, in 1973. Since 
then, many SEM articles have been published; for example, Shumow and 


--- Page 79 ---
 
 
•  
Quantitative Methods-II 
80 
Lomax (2002) tested a theoretical model of parental efficacy for adolescent 
students. For the overall sample, neighbourhood quality predicted parental 
efficacy, which predicted parental involvement and monitoring, both of which 
predicted academic and social-emotional adjustment. 
Jöreskog and van Thillo originally developed the LISREL software program at 
the Educational Testing Service (ETS). The first publicly available version, 
LISREL III, was released in 1976. Later in 1993, LISREL8 was released; it 
introduced the SIMPLIS (SIMPLE LISREL) command language in which 
equations are written using variable names. In 1999, the first interactive version 
of LISREL was released. LISREL8 introduced the dialog box interface using 
pull-down menus and point-and-click features to develop models, and the path 
diagram mode, a drawing program to develop models.. The field of structural 
equation modelling across all disciplines has expanded since 1994.  
17.3 WHY DO WE CONDUCT STRUCTURAL 
EQUATION MODELLING? 
Why is structural equation modelling popular? There are at least four major 
reasons for the popularity of SEM.  
The first reason  suggests that researchers are becoming more aware of the 
need to use multiple observed variables to better understand their area of 
scientific inquiry. Basic statistical methods only utilize a limited number of 
variables, which are not capable of dealing with the sophisticated theories 
being developed. The use of a small number of variables to understand 
complex phenomena is limiting. In contrast, structural equation modelling 
permits complex phenomena to be statistically modelled and tested.  
The second reason  involves the greater recognition given to the validity and 
reliability of observed scores from measurement instruments. Specifically, 
measurement error has become a major issue in many disciplines, but 
measurement error and statistical analysis of data have been treated separately. 
Structural equation modelling techniques explicitly take measurement error 
into account when statistically analyzing data.  
The third reason  pertains the ability to analyze more advanced theoretical 
SEM models. For example, group differences in theoretical models can be 
assessed through multiple-group SEM models. In addition, analyzing educational 
data collected at more than one level—for example, school districts, schools, and 
teachers with student data—is now possible using multilevel SEM modelling. 
These advanced SEM models and techniques have provided many researchers 
with an increased capability to analyze sophisticated theoretical models of 
complex phenomena, thus requiring less reliance on basic statistical methods. 
Finally, SEM software programs have become increasingly user friendly. For 
example, until 1993 LISREL users had to input the program syntax for their 
models using Greek and matrix notation. Today, most SEM software programs 
are Windows-based therefore, the SEM software programs are now easier to 
use and contain features similar to other Windows-based software packages.  
17.4 ASSUMPTIONS OF SEM  
Four basic  assumptions must be met for SEM to be appropriate. These are: 
