--- Page 41 ---
41
Action Research3) State the concept of action research coined by Kurt Lewin.
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
4) Do you think that action research play a catalysist role? Give reasons for
your answer in two sentences.
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
20.4 PRINCIPLES OF ACTION RESEARCH
A set of six principles according to winter guide an action research. These
principles are discussed below:
1) Reflective Critical Analysis
It is the process of becoming aware of our own perceptual biases. For example,
description or narration of a situation in any notes, transcripts, or of ficial
documents imply that it is factional and true. It claims to be reliable and
authentic. But truth in any social setting or social reality is in relative to the
teller. The principle of reflective critical analysis ensures people to reflect
on issues and practices and make explicit interpretations, biases, assumptions
and concern upon which judgments are made. In this way , practical
description can give rise to theoretical considerations.
2) Dialectical Critical Analysis
It is a way of understanding the relationships between the elements that
make up various phenomena in our context. Social reality is validated or
shared through language. Phenomena are conceptualized in dialogue.
Therefore a dialectical critical analysis is required to understand a set of
relationship both between the phenomenon and its context, and between the
elements constituting the phenomenon.  The important point is to focus
attention on those constituent elements that are unstable or opposing one
another simply because these elements are most likely to create changes.
3) Collaborative Resource
The principles of collaborative resources presuppose that each person’s ideas
are equally significant as potential resources for creating interpretive
categories of analysis, which are negotiated among the participants. It makes
possible the insight gathered between many viewpoint and within a single
viewpoint. Hence everyone’s view is taken as a contribution to understand
the situation. Participants in action research are co-researchers.
4) Risk
It is an understanding of our own taken-for-granted processes and willingness
to submit them to critique. Normally , the change process is considered a
threat to all previously established ways of doing things, thus creating


--- Page 42 ---
42
Qualitative Methods psychiatric fears among the participants. One of the most prominent fears
emanates from the risk of ego generation from open discussion of one’ s
interpretations, ideas and judgment. Initiator of action research will use this
principle to reduce other ’s fears and invite participation by assuring that
they, too, will be the subject to the same process and that whatever be the
outcome, learning will take place.
5) Plural Structure
It involves developing various accounts and critiques, rather than a single
authoritative interpretation. The action research comprises of a multiplicity
of views, Commentaries and critical analysis which lead to multiple possible
actions and interpretation. This inquiry requires much texts for reporting.
Thus, there will be many explanations made clear and range of options for
action presented. A report, therefore, acts as a support for ongoing discussion
among collaborators rather than a final conclusion of fact.
6) Theory, Practice and Transformation
Theory and practice are considered two inter-dependent yet complementary
phases of the change process. For action researchers, theory informs practice
and practice refines theory in a continuous transformation. In any setting,
people’s actions are based on implicitly held assumptions, theories and
hypotheses. With every observed result, theoretical knowledge is enhanced.
Thus, a single change process has two interwined aspects.  It is up to the
researchers to make the theoretical justifications explicit for action, and to
question the basis of that justification. The ensuring practical applications
as a follow up are subjected to further analysis in five cycles that continuously
alternates emphasis between theory and practice.
20.5 CHARACTERISTICS OF ACTION RESEARCH
Action research has the following characteristics:
1) It is collaborative, i. e. everyone’ s view is taken as a contribution in
understanding the  situation. Moreover, if a problem is faced by a practitioner
in a particular situation (say a school), action research can be collaborative
where practitioners facing similar problems in nearby schools can collaborate
to find solutions of a problem.
2) Action r esearch helps in systems planning and r estructuring. For
example, if a primary teacher finds that in his/her class the students are not
able to concentrate, the teacher starts finding the reasons for the same. After
analyzing the situation, the teacher finds that most of the children often
observe other children playing in the playground because of opening of
classroom window towards playground. They, therefore, are not able to
concentrate in their studies in the class. Now , what do you think a teacher
should do? Well, in such a case a teacher can change the seating plan of the
classroom. This is the way a teacher gets involved in restructuring the class.
3) Action research is a small-scale intervention. Its objective is to bring out
changes in the functioning of the practitioner himself/herself. It may or may
not have applicability for others. Action research is a narrowly focused
research undertaken  by teachers and other practitioners in a given specific
situation and context.


--- Page 43 ---
43
Action Research4) Contextual nature is an important characteristics of action research. For
example, a teacher of a particular school may face a particular problem in
the form of errors  committed by fifth  grade students in English comprehension
in a school but the same problem may not be observed by him/her in other
schools.
5) It enhances the competencies of the practitioners. Action research enables
practiceners to have a clear vision of the problematic situation. This becomes
helpful in identifying ways and means to tackle the problem.
6) Action research seeks to improve the quality of human relationships.
7) Action research seeks to understand particular complex social situations
whether it is a class, school or community.
8) Action research allows us to identify remedial measures for improvement.
It is specific in nature, i.e. specific to a particular class, school or situation.
Therefore, results cannot be generalized.
9) It is a systematic and scientific process but not very rigorous.
10) Action research is participatory: it is research through which people work
towards the improvement of their own practices.
11) Action research makes use of quantitative and qualitative methodologies.
12) Action research is open-minded about what counts as evidence (or data) – it
involves not only keeping records which describe what is happening as
accurately as possible . . . but also  collecting and analysing our own
judgements, reactions and impressions about what is going on.
13) Action research is a political process because it involves us in making changes
that will affect others.
14) It is a systematic learning pr ocess wherein people act deliberately , but
remaining open to surprises and responsive to opportunities.
15) Action research allows us to build records of our improvements and changing
activities and practices. It records the changes in the language and discourse
we describe, explain and justify our practices. It also documents changes in
the social relationships and forms of organization which characterize and
constrain our practices.
20.6 MODELS OF ACTION RESEARCH
Numerous authors and researchers have proposed models for undertaking the
action research. Because the process involved in action research is somewhat
dynamic, various models look a bit dif ferent from one another but possess
numerous common elements. S tarting with a central problem or topic, action
research models involve some observation or monitoring of current practice,
followed by the collection and synthesis of information and data. Finally, some
sort of action is taken, which serves as the basis for next stage of action research.
Some models are simple in their design, while others appear relatively complex.
Let us discuss some models of action research as an illustration.


--- Page 44 ---
44
Qualitative Methods 20.6.1 Kemmis and McTaggart’s Spiral Model
These two authors describe this model as participatory research. In this model,
action research involves a spiral of self-reflective cycles of:
• Planning a change.
• Acting and observing the process and consequences of the change.
• Reflecting on these processes and consequences and then re-planning.
• Acting and observing.
• Reflecting, etc.
Fig. 20.1: Kemmis and McTaggart’s Action Research Spiral
Kemmis and McTaggart’s (2000) do not recommend to use it as a rigid structure.
They maintain that in reality the process may not be as neat as the spiral of self-
contained cycles of planning, acting, observing, and reflecting suggests. These
stages, they maintain, will overlap, and initial plans will quickly become obsolete
in the light of learning from experience. In reality the process is likely to be more
fluid, open, and responsive.
We find the spiral model appealing because it gives an opportunity to visit a
phenomenon at a higher level each time and so to progress towards a greater
overall understanding. By carrying out action research using this model, you can
understand a particular issue within a healthcare context and make informed
decisions with an enhanced understanding. It is therefore about empowerment.
However, Winter and Munn-Giddings (2001) point out that the spiral model
may suggest that even the basic process may take a long time to complete.


--- Page 45 ---
45
Action Research20.6.2 Elliot’s Action Research Model
The model employed by Elliot (1991) shares many of the features of that of
Kemmis and McTaggart and is based on Lewin’s work of the 1940s. It includes
identifying a general idea, reconnaissance or fact-finding, planning, action,
evaluation, amending plan and taking second action step, and so on, as can be
seen in Figure 20.2.
Fig. 20.2: Elliot’s Action Research Model
Source: Ellliot, J. Action Research for Educational Change
20.6.3 O’Leary’s Cycles of Action Research Model
Cycles of action research shown in Figure 20.3, portray action research as a
cyclic process which takes shape as knowledge emer ges. In this model, it is
stressed that ‘cycles conver ge towards better understanding of situation and
improved action implementation. Cycle of actions are based in evaluative practice
that alters between action and critical reflection’. O’Leary sees action research
as an experiential learning approach to change, where the goal is to continually
Monitor Implimentation
and effects
Monitor Implimentation
and effects
‘Reconnaissance’
(explain any failure to
implement, and effects)
‘Reconnaissance’
(explain any failure to
implement, and effects)
‘Reconnaissance’
(explain any failure to
implement, and effects)
Monitor Implimentation
and effects
Amended plan
Action Steps 1
Action Steps 2
Action Steps 3
Amended plan
Action Steps 1
Action Steps 2
Action Steps 3
Identifying
Initial Idea
Reconnaissance
(Fact-finding and analysis)
General Pain
Action Steps 1
Action Steps 2
Action Steps 3
Implement
Action Steps 1
Revise general idea
Implement next
action Steps
Revise general idea
Implement next
action Steps
CYCLE 1CYCLE 2CYCLE 3


--- Page 46 ---
46
Qualitative Methods refine the methods, data, and interpretation in the light of understanding developed
in each earlier cycle.
Fig. 20.3: O’Leary’s Cycles of Research
20.6.4 Stringer’s Interacting Spiral Action Research Model
“Simple, yet powerful framework” consisting of a “look, think, and act” routine.
During each stage, participants observe, reflect, and then take some sort of action.
This action leads them into the next stage (see Figure 20.4).
Fig. 20.4: Stringer’s Interacting Spiral Action Research Model
20.6.5 Kurt Lewin’s Action Research Spiral Model
Stringer propounded interacting spiral model and viewed that “action research”—
also depicts an action research spiral, which includes fact finding, planning, taking
action, evaluating, and amending the plan, before moving into a second action
step (see Figure 20.5)


--- Page 47 ---
47
Action Research
Fig. 20.5:  Lewin’s Action Research Spiral
Source: Adapted from Encyclopedia of Informal Education. (www.infed.org).
20.6.6 Calhoun’s Action Research Cycle Model
While not appearing as a “spiral,” still represents a process that is built around a
cyclical notion. As she describes, the solid lines indicate the primary direction of
the action research cycle through the phases in numerical order. The dotted lines
indicate backward and forward movement within the cycle as refinement or
clarification of information is warranted (see Figure 20.6).
Fig. 20.6:  Calhoun’s Action Research Cycle
20.6.7   Bachman’s Action Research Spiral Model
Action research spiral continues this notion of the cyclical nature of action research
(see Figure 20.7). His downward spiral suggests that participants gather
information, plan actions, observe and evaluate those actions, and then reflect
and plan for a new cycle of the spiral, based on the insights that were gained in
the previous cycle.


--- Page 48 ---
48
Qualitative Methods
Fig. 20.7: Bachman’s Action Research Spiral Model
20.6.8 Riel’s Progressive Problem Solving Model
Through action research model takes the participants through four steps in each
cycle: planning, taking action, collecting evidence, and reflecting (see Figure
20.8).


--- Page 49 ---
49
Action Research
Fig. 20.8: Riel’s Action Research Model
20.6.9 Hendricks’s Action Research Model
It is shown in Figure 20.9. In her model, which she has placed in a school-based
context, focuses on acting, evaluating, and reflecting.
Fig. 20.9: Hendricks’s Action Research Process
Source: Adapted from Improving Schools Through Action Research: A Comprehensive Guide
for Educators, by Cher Hendricks, 2009, Boston: Allyn& Bacon.


--- Page 50 ---
50
Qualitative Methods From the above different models of action research, it can be inferred that the
following four stages are essential features of the model. However, this does not
mean that this is how all action research projects will work. The flexibility of
action research based on constant evaluation and reflection means that the cycles
may be truncated as new ways to proceed further.
i) Planning
Identifying the issue to be changed looking elsewhere for information. Similar
projects may be useful, for developing the questions and research methods
to be used to develop a plan related to the specific environment. In the school
setting this could involve personnel, budgets and the use of outside agencies.
ii) Acting
Trialling the change following your plan, collecting and compiling evidence,
questioning the process and making changes as required.
iii) Observing
Analysing the evidence and collating the findings, discussing the findings
with co-researchers and /or colleagues for interpretation, writing the report,
sharing your findings with stakeholders and peers.
iv) Reflecting
Evaluating the first cycle of the process, implementing the findings or new
strategy, revisiting the process.
These features might be represented diagrammatically as given below
Fig. 20.10
While working through action research remember that:
• It is cyclical and progress is made in small chunks,
• It is heavily based on critical reflection you can use.
