--- Page 1 ---
MEC-109
Research Methods
in Economics
QUALITATIVE METHODS
UNIT 18
Participatory Method 5
UNIT 19
Content Analysis 21
UNIT 20
Action Research 37
Block
5
Indira Gandhi
National Open University
School of Social Sciences


--- Page 2 ---
Prof. D.N. Reddy
Rtd. Professor of Economics
University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad
Prof. Harishankar Asthana
Professor of Psychology
Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi
Prof. Chandan Mukherjee
Professor and Dean
School of Development Studies
Ambedkar University, New Delhi
Prof. V.R. Panchmukhi
Rtd. Professor of Economics
Bombay University and Former
Chairman ICSSR, New Delhi
Prof. Achal Kumar Gaur
Professor of Economics
Faculty of Social Sciences
Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi
Prof. P.K. Chaubey
Professor, Indian Institute of Public
Administration, New Delhi
Shri S.S. Suryanarayana
Rtd. Joint Advisor
Planning Commission, New Delhi
Expert Committee
Prof. Romar Korea
Professor of Economics
University of Mumbai
Mumbai
Dr. Manish Gupta
Sr. Economist
National Institute of Public
Finance and Policy
New Delhi
Prof. Anjila Gupta
Professor of Economics
IGNOU, New Delhi
Prof. Narayan Prasad (Convenor)
Professor of Economics
IGNOU, New Delhi
Prof. K. Barik
Professor of Economics
IGNOU, New Delhi
Dr. B.S. Prakash
Associate Professor in Economics
IGNOU, New Delhi
Shri Saugato Sen
Associate Professor in Economics
IGNOU, New Delhi
Print Production
Mr. Manjit Singh
Section Officer (Pub.)
SOSS, IGNOU, New Delhi
October, 2015
 Indira Gandhi National Open University , 2015
ISBN-978-81-266-
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be r eproduced in any form, by mimeograph or any other
means, without permission in writing fr om the Indira Gandhi National Open University .
Further information on Indira Gandhi National Open University courses may be obtained fr om the
University's office at Maidan Gar hi. New Delhi-1 10 068.
Printed and published on behalf of the Indira Gandhi National Open University , New Delhi by the
Director, School of Social Sciences.
Laser Typeset by : Tessa Media & Computers, C-206, A.F.E.-II, Okhla, New Delhi
Printed at :
Course Coordinator and Editor: Prof. Narayan Prasad
Block Preparation Team
Units Resource Person
18 Prof. Shalina Mehta
Professor
Department of Anthropology
Panjab University
Chandigarh
19-20 Prof. H.S. Asthana
Professor
Department of Psychology
Banaras Hindu University
Varanasi
IGNOU Faculty
(Format, Language and Conent Editing)
Prof. Narayan Prasad
Professor of Economics
IGNOU, New Delhi
Prof. Narayan Prasad
Professor of Economics
IGNOU, New Delhi


--- Page 3 ---
BLOCK 5 QUALITATIVE METHODS
As explained in Block 1 of this course, the major dif ference between the
quantitative approach and qualitative approach is not the type of data used or
preferred but is much broader and deeper. The quantitative research is associated
with positivist and post-positivist paradigm whereas qualitative research is
associated with interpretative paradigm and critical theory paradigm.
Notwithstanding with the debate about quantitative research vs. qualitative
research, a researcher may use either quantitative methods or qualitative methods
or mixed methods blending the techniques of the two. In Block 3 and 4 we have
covered various quantitative methods of data analysis. In this block you will
find the qualitative methods exclusively associated with interpretative paradigm
and critical theory paradigm. This block comprises of 3 units.
Unit 18  on Participatory Method throwing light on the limitations of the
methods to collect quantitative data either through primary survey or secondary
sources covers the various tools and techniques used in collection and analysis
of qualitative data under participatory method and its advantages.
Unit 19 on Content Analysis deals with the conceptual and methodological
issues related to content analysis as a research method to undertake research
studies in social sciences in general and in economics in particular.
Unit 20 entitled Action Research throws light on Action Research as an offshoot
to emancipatory method associated with critical theory paradigm wherein
knowledge is generated in the process of knowing through doing rather through
conceptualization and theorizing. This unit covers the various models of action
research and the different steps involved in conducting action research.


--- Page 4 ---
4
Qualitative Methods


--- Page 5 ---
5
Participatory Method
UNIT 18 PARTICIPA TORY METHOD
Structure
18.0 Objectives
18.1 Introduction
18.2 What is Participatory Research?
18.3 Methods of Participatory Research: Observation Method
18.3.1 Participant Observation
18.3.2 Non-Participant Observation
18.3.3 Quasi-participant Observation
18.4 Focused Interview
18.5 Oral Histories
18.6 Life History
18.7 Case Study Method
18.8 Narratives
18.9 Focus Group Discussion
18.10 Grounded Theory
18.10.1 Data Sources and Sampling
18.10.2 Subjectivity
18.10.3 Transcription
18.11 Analysis of Qualitative Data
18.12 Report Writing
18.13 Criticism of Participatory Methods
18.14 Advantages of Participatory Research
18.15 Let Us Sum Up
18.16 Key Words
18.17 Some Useful Books/Readings
18.18 Answers or Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises
18.0 OBJECTIVES
After going through this Unit, you will be able to:
• state the concept of participatory research;
• state the distinction between data collection and data generation;
• explain the various tools of participatory research;
• discuss the grounded theory as a method of inductive theorising;
• identify the various steps involved in the analysis of qualitative data;
• pinpoint the major criticisms against participatory methods; and
• draw the lessons for participatory researchers.


--- Page 6 ---
6
Qualitative Methods
18.1 INTRODUCTION
As discussed in Unit 6, traditionally two approaches – quantitative research
associated with post positivist paradigm and qualitative research associated with
interpretative paradigm have been followed in undertaking research in social
sciences. The researchers working in the area of economics (both in micro and
macro) generally rely upon the inferences drawn from the large pool of data. The
data for these studies are collected either by the data compiling agencies or by
the individuals hired for data collection without involvement of individual
researchers in the field. The results of such quantitative research are insensitive
to context and ignore the people’ s voices or their views about which studies
have been undertaken. Instead researcher’s opinion is imposed on what people
say and want. The collection of quantitative data through sampling survey and
its analysis involving several steps is time consuming. In the situation of natural
calamities and disasters like tsunami, we cannot wait for the outcome of
quantitative research. Further, quantitative research has not been very effective
in evaluation of poverty alleviation schemes and programmes. In such situation,
alternative method i.e. participatory method is increasingly being used in social
sciences to generate and analyse the data.
Hence, in this unit, we shall take up the various issues related to participatory
methods like concept of participatory research, the various tools to collect
qualitative data, analysis of qualitative data, advantages, limitations and important
lessons for participatory research etc. Let us begin with explanation of the concept
of participatory research.
18.2 WHAT IS PARTICIPA TORY RESEARCH?
The fundamental premise of participatory research involves the direct participation
of researcher in the process of data generation. Important distinction is made
here between data collection and data generation. When data is collected by an
agency on lar ge sample populations, standardizations are made with the
assumption that all those being interviewed will understand and respond to the
questions in the manner in which the primary researcher has conceptualized it.
In the field situation this may or may not be the case. Each field researcher
asking those questions may convey a different meaning and the respondent may
give answer that may not fit into any of the standard categories, but the field
researcher will reduce the answer and fit it in any of the given categories in a
structured schedule. Hence, the results obtained may not necessarily reflect the
market sentiments or the opinion of the people involved in the study. It is for this
reason that this process of procuring data using survey method and questionnaire
is called data collection.
In participatory research, the primary researcher is always in contact with the
respondent and has a face-to-face interaction. If the researcher thinks that the
respondent has not understood the query , he has the freedom to change the
language or reconstruct his probe question or collect information from other
indirect source. In this approach called data generation, the researcher has the
flexibility to generate multiple answers to a single query and then use his/her
interpretative skills to draw inference or meaning out of it to arrive at a
generalization. In participatory method of data generation, the process of data


--- Page 7 ---
7
Participatory Methodcollection and analysis proceeds simultaneously , making it more reliable and
presenting plurality of responses and possibilities. It is this flexibility and its
ability to generate reliable generalizations that participatory methods of research
have acquired importance in research methodology being used by present day
economists.
Let us first try and understand what participatory research is and how and where
it began? Methods of participatory research first find mention in anthropological
empirical research commonly known as ethnography. Ethnography is defined as
a method used to generate qualitative data from an insider’s perspective known
as EMIC view. In simple terms it implies that the people about whom we are
writing, must tell their stories and the researcher simply interprets them as “thick
description” (Geertz, 1973). People’s voices are critical to research instead of
researcher’s imposition of his opinion on what people say and want.
18.3 METHODS OF PARTICIPA TORY RESEARCH:
OBSERV A TION METHOD
Bronislaw Malinowski is regarded as the founding father of this methodology.
He described this method as “participant observation”. He stayed for more than
three years among the “Trobriand Islanders” and described their lifeway’s in a
classic ethnographic work titled Argonauts of Western Pacific first published in
1922. Methods of participatory research in the last ninety years or more have
been defined and redefined in many dif ferent ways. Malinowski’s method of
participant observations demands the researcher ’s stay in the field area for
prolonged periods and become a part of the society that he/she is researching.
Later researchers realized that it was always not possible to stay for extended
duration  (from three months to three years and in some cases even longer) in the
field and some problems can require immediate and urgent interventions. Another
critique of participant observation is that an interviewer is always an outsider
and even when he lives at a particular field site for long periods, there is no
guarantee that the community will view him as an insider and share every aspect
of their private lives with the researcher.
Nonetheless, none of these limitations influenced the importance of using
observations as one of the most important tools of participatory researches. Balki
(2009:206) calls it as “qualitative method par excellence”. Bryman (1998, 47-9)
puts forward a case for method of observation by saying that it is not a single
method but can combine several ways of doing observations. Given the significance
of method of observation, the techniques went in for some modifications. There
are three important ways of doing observations that are now recognized: (i)
Participant Observations, (ii) Quasi-Participant Observations, (iii) Non-
Participant Observations.
18.3.1 Participant Observations
Uncontrolled Participant observation is defined by Goode & Hatt (1981: 121) as
a procedure in which “the investigator can so disguise himself as to be accepted
as a member of the group”. When researchers live at a field site for long duration,
the assumption is that they are regarded as member of the community or the
group. A researcher wanting to study consumer behaviour may not disclose his
identity as a researcher and pretend to be a consumer, sharing their experiences


--- Page 8 ---
8
Qualitative Methods and concerns. While doing participant research, researchers often assume insider
identity. Sometimes researchers take neutral positions without disclosing the
real purpose of their being there.
Advantages of Participant Observation Method
Researcher can record all the information relevant for his work without disturbing
the community and intruding upfront into their privacy . Instead of sitting in a
corner in the market, an organization or any other work or field situation writing
notes, the researcher participates in these activities. In doing so, he collects relevant
information without disturbing the normal activities and records his observations
in a work diary. Thereafter, he makes a mental note of it and returns to his/her
workplace and records these observations immediately. The community or people
may not be aware that they are being researched. This helps obtain unhindered
and unbiased information.
Participant observation helps to obtain detailed information without any subject
bias. Many researchers regard it as a better tool for data gathering vis-à-vis
questionnaire and in-depth interviews.
Drawbacks of Participant Observation Method
One of the major drawbacks of participant observation is its inability to develop
procedures for standardization. Researcher doing participant observation acquires
a specific position in the community and observes from this vantage point. His
recordings are personal or individual specific. Another observer observing the
same situation may not be able to view it with the same perspective.
In participant observation method, the researcher may get emotionally involved
with the issues and tends to loose his/her objectivity . This often happens on
issues of dowry, bride burning, female foeticide, student agitations, price rise,
public-private partnership, trade union activities etc.
To overcome some of these drawbacks, researchers proposed method of non-
participant observations.
18.3.2 Non-Participant Observation
The qualitative researchers innovate in several ways to do non-participant
observations. Many of them would participate in some activities and observe
others from the outside. Some others would use video- recordings and analyse
these recordings later for generalizations. While doing so, it was possible to take
into account people’s gestures and non-verbal movements for detailed scrutiny.
However, critics of the method thought that as one is not fully participating in
this situation, he/she is not in a position to attribute right meaning to these
observations.
Sometimes, researchers use hidden cameras and record individual observations
separately. But there are several problems with this method of observations too.
Many regard use of hidden camera for research unethical. Participating in some
activities and not in others amounted to what researchers later called as Quasi-
participant observation.


--- Page 9 ---
9
Participatory Method18.3.3 Quasi- Participant Observation
Most researchers these days prefer to use quasi-participant method of
observations. In this method, the researcher can follow the dual entry system.
For instance, if you are trying to examine labour management relations, it is
imperative that you obtain permission from the management and also establish
rapport with the trade union leaders to have access to the union meetings. Many
a times, one has to conduct interviews in different locations. In one such study in
Punjab and Uttar Pradesh, we found that the workers preferred to talk to the
researcher outside the factory . The researcher would talk to the mangers and
supervisors in the factory and had lunch in the workers canteen. Appointments
were fixed with the workers while having lunch and then researcher went to
their houses, often spent hours there and after completing the interviews with
the supervisors and mangers hired a small room in the same slum area, where
most of the workers lived and shared their daily experiences.
In addition to the important research tool of observations, qualitative researchers
often use Focused interview, in-depth interviews, narratives and oral /Life case
histories, Focus group discussion/interviews’, and content analysis. These tools
have been discussed in next sections.
Check Your Progress 1
1) What is the distinction between data collection and data generation?
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
2) What do you mean by the term EMIC view?
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
3) How is participant observation method dif ferent from non-participant
observation method?
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
18.4 FOCUSED INTERVIEW
In a focused interview, the researcher and the respondent are engaged in face-to-
face or one to one conversation in which the researcher poses questions and the
respondent provides detailed or precise answers. Talking to people or a specified
group of people selected randomly, using an interview schedule, interview guide
or a structured questionnaire is standard method of data collection. For qualitative


--- Page 10 ---
10
Qualitative Methods research, focused interviews are often unstructured and questions are invariably
open ended. This gives the respondent liberty to provide extensive answers.
It is important to remember that interview is “fundamentally a process of social
interaction” and involves developing a social relationship. In an interview situation
it is not only the interviewer but also the interviewee who makes an opinion
about the researcher. Respondent’s responses can be determined by what he thinks
what the researcher may expect from him and also the amount of trust and faith
he invests in the researcher . We will repeatedly stress the importance of
confidentiality and researcher ’s ability to convey the same as hallmarks of
participatory research.
18.5 ORAL HISTORIES
Uninterrupted long interviews giving space to the respondents to express his
opinion or experiences at length is the preferred method by several qualitative
researchers. The interviewee is encouraged to share his life experiences, to express
his opinion, to recollect and recount their antecedents or lives of their
contemporaries, “and to discuss their perceptions of the processes involved and
the changes they have seen”(Balki, 2010:207). Collecting oral histories or
narratives requires skill of being a good listener. Many a times, you may assume
that the information provided by the respondent is not directly related to the area
of your focused interest. But that subsidiary information can provide certain
reference for a better understanding of the problem, issues or question that you
are exploring. In oral histories, one may pose probing questions in the beginning
and then occasionally intervene to ask a lead question for seeking any detailed
answer to specific query.
18.6 LIFE HISTORY
Another important tool that ethnographic and qualitative researchers have in
their kit is called the life history method. In this method life histories of individuals
are reconstructed to understand the historical events of that period. Many a times
researchers would use diaries and autobiographies to construct chronology of
events of that period. Recording experiences of individuals facilitates
understanding of how and what happened in certain circumstances. Life history
approach is largely dependent on the ability of the respondent to recall and share
that memory with the researcher . With the help of the respondent, researcher
gradually determines the social processes. In the context of economics, rise and
fall of a particular model is determined by prevalent social processes of that
period, e.g. popularity and weakening of models of conservative and liberal
economics in the last fifty years. It also helps to understand different perspectives
based on gender and class. While recollecting their life history , many a times
respondents may fall silent. This silence also provides data as it tells the researcher,
how that particular event may have caused anxiety , anguish or an intense
emotional experience to the respondent.
18.7 CASE STUDY METHOD
To study firms and organization’s behaviour, Business economists use the case
study method. The researcher can focus on one company or or ganization and
