--- Page 73 ---
73
Foundations of Qualitative
Research: Interpretativism
and Critical Theory
Paradigm
Before embarking on meaningful research using qualitative approach, it is
important to understand the meaning, nature of reality , methodology and the
essence of these two paradigms. Let us begin with interpretative paradigm.
5.2 INTERPRETIVE PARADIGM
Interpretive research assumes “that our knowledge of reality is gained only through
social constructions such as language, consciousness, shared meanings,
documents, tools, and other artifacts” (Klein & Myers, p. 69). As the term
indicates, interpretive paradigm looks for understanding of a particular context.
Interpretivists believe that it is important to understand the context in which
research is conducted for proper interpretation of the data. The interest of
interpretivists lies not in the generation of a new theory, but to judge or evaluate
and refine interpretive theories. Researchers using an interpretive approach aim
to uncover meaning towards a better understanding of the issues involved. The
underlying ontological assumption of interpretive paradigm is subjectivism as
here reality is viewed as socially constructed and interpreted. Epistemological
assumption is that knowledge of reality is obtained from the accounts that social
actors provide. Neuman (1997) affirms that “social reality is based on people’s
definition of it” (p. 69). From the previous assertions, it is apparent that interpretive
researchers do not recognize the existence of an objective world. On the contrary,
they see the world strongly bounded by particular time and specific context.
Therefore, the epistemological question, “What is the nature of the relationship
between the knower or would-be knower and what can be known” (Guba &
Lincoln, 1994, p. 108) must be answered in a consistent way with the ontological
view. The interpretive researcher’s epistemological assumption is that “findings
are literally created as the investigation proceeds” (Guba & Lincoln, p. 1 11).
Moreover, they explicitly recognise that “understanding social reality requires
understanding how practices and meanings are formed and informed by the
language and tacit norms shared by humans working towards some shared goal”
(Orlikowski & Baroudi, 1991, p. 14).
Interpretive research focuses on identifying, documenting, and ‘knowing’ –
through interpretation of :
– world views,
– values,
– meanings,
– beliefs,
– thoughts and the general characteristics of life events, situations, ceremonies
and specific phenomena under investigation,
– the goal being to document and interpret as fully as possible the totality of
whatever is being studied in particular contexts from the people’s viewpoint
or frame of reference.
Interpretivists assert that all research is influenced and shaped by pre-existing
theories and world-views of the researchers. The terms, procedures and data of
research have meaning because a group of scholars has agreed on that meaning.


--- Page 74 ---
74
Research Methodology:
Issues and Perspectives
Research is thus a socially constructed activity. Three other approaches support
the philosophy of interpretive paradigm. They are Verstehen, hermeneutics and
phenomenology. Verstehen stresses on the understanding of the particulars of a
situation, hermeneutics emphasizes on the importance of language and context
in understanding and phenomenology on people’s perception of the world.
Methodology
Foundationalism is an approach that asserts research can begin with self-evident
truths which can serve as the starting point for our understanding of the world.
Interpretivists are anti-foundationalists as they believe that the standards that
guide research are products of a particular group or culture. They use a broad
range of qualitative methods and gather thoughtful reflections of experienced
practitioners. Interpretative approaches rely heavily on naturalistic methods
(interviewing and observation) and their methods generally ensure an adequate
dialogue between the researchers and the people with whom they interact to be
able to construct a meaningful reality. These meanings emerge from the research
process. Certain methodologies used in interpretive research are:
Naturalistic inquiry, that uses first-hand observation to understand human action
and studies real-life situations as they unfold. It is non-manipulative and non-
controlling, hence has lack of predetermined constraints on outcomes;
Phenomenologic methodologies, rely on descriptions of conscious experiences
to develop understanding of the meaning of human action;
Constructivism, makes use of perception or self-experience in making and
structuring knowledge;
Ethnographic inquiry, rely on self-experiencing the culture of participants in the
field;
Symbolic interactionism, understands human action as per the meanings derived
by the human beings for particular objects and people.
Some other methods for data-collection are surveys, interviews, field observation,
witness accounts, focus group discussion. Interpretive research adds to the
understanding of dif ferent contexts and situations. Interpretivists ar gue that
research results should be applied to higher, conceptual level. From the data, a
researcher tries to understand multiple perspectives on the same topic. For
analyzing the meaning of data, interpretive researchers may use and conduct
research by methods from another paradigm (eg. Post-positivism) also and doing
so would lead to reinterpreting the meaning of results by another perspective.
With a philosophical alignment with interpretive naturalistic orientations,
interpretive description acknowledges the constructed and contextual nature of
human experience that at the same time allows for shared realities (Thorne, Reimer
Kirkham, & MacDonald-Emes, 1997). Key axioms of naturalistic inquiry, such
as those delineated by Lincoln and Guba (1985), provide philosophical
underpinnings for research design, including:
1) There are multiple constructed realities that can be studied only holistically.
Thus, reality is complex, contextual, constructed, and ultimately subjective.


--- Page 75 ---
75
Foundations of Qualitative
Research: Interpretativism
and Critical Theory
Paradigm
2) The inquirer and the “object” of inquiry interact to influence one another;
indeed, the knower and known are inseparable.
3) No a priori theory could possibly encompass the multiple realities that are
likely to be encountered; rather, theory must emerge or be grounded in the
data.
Research Strategy for Interpretivism
Broadly there are four distinct research strategies that work with dif ferent
ontological assumptions. Abduction strategy best fulfills the needs of interpretive
researcher as it starts with laying the concepts and meanings that are contained
in social quarter’s accounts of activities related to a research problem.
As interpretivists construct reality on the accounts of social actors present in a
specific situation, it is important to take into account the different perspectives
of each participant. One can understand the complexity of the issue through the
following example, excerpts taken from Andrade, 2009.
Let’s imagine a scenario at the beach in which a huge wave is approaching the
shore. There is an excited surfer on top of the big wave and two scared children
in a small inflatable boat right below the colossal wave. On the shore, a girl is
admiring her boyfriend’s dexterity and the petrified children’s mother is watching
the looming mass of water approaching the boat. On the adjacent cliff there is a
relaxed monk meditating on the infiniteness of the universe, while enjoying the
sea breeze and the sound of the sea. If we want to conduct research on what that
wave means for beach-goers, our results will depend on who the respondent is.
Interviewing one of the participants would give insights from that participant’s
perspective only, which may be insufficient, or even misleading, because their
personal and intimate experiences with the wave are quite different from that of
the others. If the interpretive researcher wants to create an integral and persuasive
piece of r esearch ar ound this phenomenon, each par ticipant’ s differ ent
perspectives should be included.
To conduct interpretive research on a certain setting, intense and long-term
participant observation is required, followed by deliberate and long-term reflection
on what was observed. Interpretive researchers start out with the assumption
that access to reality (given or socially constructed) is only through social
constructions such as language, consciousness and shared meanings. Interpretive
studies generally attempt to understand phenomena through the meanings that
people assign to them and interpretive methods of research in IS are “aimed at
producing an understanding of the context of the information system, and the
process whereby the information system influences and is influenced by the
context. Interpretive research does not predefine dependent and independent
variables, but focuses on the full complexity of human sense making as the
situation emerges.
The life-cycle of theory-generation under interpretive paradigm has been depicted
in the following flow-chart:


--- Page 76 ---
76
Research Methodology:
Issues and Perspectives
Criticism
Researchers who wish to use interpretive framework for their case-studies are
cautioned not to lose theoretical sensitivity . Strauss and Corbin (1990, p. 41)
describe theoretical sensitivity as the “awareness of the subtleties of meaning of
data” and elaborate that “one can come to a research situation with varying degrees
of sensitivity depending upon previous reading and experience with or relevant
to that area.” Ultimately , the researcher has to evaluate the relevance of their
preliminary theoretical framework vis-à-vis the actual findings (Urquhart, 2001,
2007). The criteria to be kept in mind for using interpretive case studies aiming
for theory-building can be seen in the appendix to the unit.
Differences of Interpretive paradigm from post-positivism can be broadly
summarized in the table below:
Differences between Post-positivism and Interpretivism on Five major Issues
Review relevant theory (literature)
Define research questions
Determine suitable research methods and site(s)
Experimental, observ ational, action research or case studies
Analysis using qualitative or quantitative methods
Theory sugg es tion, confirmation, constrains or extension
Publish Conclusions
Interpretivism
Socially constructed
Reflect understanding
Subjective and Objective
research methods are acceptable
Nature of reality
Purpose of research
Acceptable methods
and data
Post-positivism
External to human mind
Find Universals
Scientific method


--- Page 77 ---
77
Foundations of Qualitative
Research: Interpretativism
and Critical Theory
Paradigm
Check Your Progress 1
1) Explain how interpretive framework is a departure from post-positivism?
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
2) Outline the methodology of interpretive research using a suitable example
from your locality.
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
3) How do the ontological and epistemological assumptions underlying
interpretive paradigm guide the researcher to the methodology of research,
data-collection and analysis?
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
5.3 CRITICAL THEORY PARADIGM
Critical theories share some ideas of the interpretative paradigm, but what makes
it different is that critical paradigm focuses on oppression. Critical social scientists
believe it necessary to understand the lived experience of real people in context.
Persons can perceive reality outside them and represent that reality with language.
Also, reality is defined by the interaction between the knower and the known.
Critical approaches examine social conditions and uncover oppressive power
arrangements. ‘Critical theory’ is a term that can apply to a number of movements
in the social sciences. As it is based on ideology of class conflict, the critical
theorists whose objective is to find out power-relationships among the different
sections of the society (between the doers and the oppressed), it is sometimes
referred as ‘ideologically oriented inquiry , neo-Marxism, materialism, the
Frankfurt School and freireism. Critical theory was built on the foundation of
Marxism which perceived conflicts between classes in society and believed that
it could be reformed only via radical transformation of the society. The roots of
the critical theory can be traced to the Frankfurt school or the Institute for Social
Interpretivism
Understanding is contextual.
Universals are deemphasized
Integrated activities.
Both guide and become the
other.
Meaning of data
Relationship of
research to practice
Post-positivism
Falsification
Use to test theory
Separate activities.
Research guides practice
(Source: Foundations of qualitative research by Jerry W. Willis (2007) p.95)


--- Page 78 ---
78
Research Methodology:
Issues and Perspectives
Research. It was established as a school of thought primarily by five Frankfurt
school theoreticians; Herbert Marcuse, Theodor Adorno, Max Horkheimer, Walter
Benjamin and Erich Fromm. The underlying ontological assumption of critical
theory paradigm is substantialism wherein matter constitutes the reality. However,
epistemologically people interpret reality differently in different times and places.
Critical Theory is a theoretical tradition developed most notably by Horkeimer,
Adorno, Marcuse at the Frankfort School.  Their work is a critical response to
the works of Marx, Kant, Hegel and Weber.    
• Historical ontology – assumes that there is a ‘reality’ that is apprehendable. 
This is a reality created and shaped by social, political, cultural, economic,
ethnic and gender-based forces that have been reified or crystallized over
time into social structures that are taken to be natural or real.  People,
including researchers, function under the assumption that for all practical
purposes these structures are real.  Critical theorist believe this assumption
is inappropriate.
• Modified transactional or subjectivist epistemology – we cannot separate
ourselves from what we know and this inevitably influences inquiry. What
can be known is inextricably tied to the interaction between a particular
investigator and a particular object or group.
Purpose of Research
Research that aspires to be critical seeks, as its purpose of inquiry, to confront
injustices in society . Following a tradition associated with Antonio Gramsci,
critical researchers aim to understand the relationship between societal structures
(especially those economic and political) and ideological patterns of thought
that constrain the human imagination and thus limit opportunities for confronting
and changing unjust social systems. Critical theorists are committed to
understanding the complexity of such relations, however , and thus distance
themselves from what they see as reductionist Marxist approaches. Critical
theorists hold that these earlier approaches of fered no ability to explain social
change. Thus, in contrast to what they believe was an overemphasis on the
determinative nature of economic and political structures, critical theorists are
interested in social change as it occurs in relation to social struggle. Critical
researchers assume that the knowledge developed in their research may serve as
a first step toward addressing such injustices. As an approach with a definite
normative dimension, the research aims for a transformative outcome, and thus
is not interested in “knowledge for knowledge’s sake.” 
Critical Theory is multi-disciplinary. It finds its applications in anthropology ,
economics, art criticism, education, history , psychology , political science,
sociology and theology. An interesting question is why and where to apply critical
theory paradigm in research. To begin with, research and practice are integrated
activities in the critical paradigm. It not only studies power relationships which
are critical factors in the society, the injustices and the inequities, the contradictions
and the incoherencies, but also aims at helping and empowering those who are
oppressed to free themselves from their oppression.
Critical theory paradigm should be applied where the objective of the researcher
is to analyse the power structures in a set-up or social problems arising of such
structures. For example, it can be used to understand wage inequities between
male, female and child workers in the society.


--- Page 79 ---
79
Foundations of Qualitative
Research: Interpretativism
and Critical Theory
Paradigm
Nature of reality: Critical theorists like post-positivists believe that reality is
material and external to human mind but they interpret it dif ferently. They
question/critique the existing reality and analyze why such a reality exists and
whether it contributes positively/negatively to human mind. Further , they also
advocate evolving ways and means to reform the existing system if it is bifurcating
the society into the have’s and the have not’s.
Methodology: Critical theorists suggest two kinds of research methodologies,
namely ideology critique and action research, for undertaking research work.
They rely on methods combining observation and interviewing with approaches
that foster conversation and reflection. They try to challenge guiding assumptions
and they begin this by asking people to reflect and question their current
experience with regard to values identified. In doing research, they not only try
to define a situation but change the situation.
As a research methodology, critical theory adopts an overtly critical approach to
inquiry. It precedes with an attitude of suspicion, calling into question not only
the data itself, but also the researcher, the research design and interpretation of
findings. From a critical theory viewpoint, the task of the social scientist has
three dimensions:
1) To understand the ideologically distorted subjective situation of some
individual or group;
2) To explore the forces that has caused that situation;
3) To show that these forces can be overcome through awareness of them on
the part of the oppressed individual or group in question.
The appropriate research strategy for critical research is Retroduction as it begins
with a hypothetical mode of a mechanism that could explain the occurrence of a
phenomenon under investigation.
• Critical theoretical approaches tend to rely on dialogic methods; methods
combining observation and interviewing with approaches that foster
conversation and reflection.  This reflective dialogic allows the researcher
and the participants to question the ‘natural’ state and challenge the
mechanisms for order maintenance.  This is a way to reclaim conflict and
tension.
• Rather than naming and describing, the critical theorists try to challenge
guiding assumptions.
• Critical theorists usually do this by beginning with an assumption about
what is good (e.g. autonomy, democracy) and asking people in a social group,
culture or organization to reflect on and question their current experience
with regard to the values identified (e.g. To what extent are they an
autonomous worker?) 
• Critical theorists not only just try to describe a situation from a particular
vantage point or set of values (e.g. the need for greater autonomy or
democracy in a particular setting), but also try to change the situation.


--- Page 80 ---
80
Research Methodology:
Issues and Perspectives
“Objective” analysis
In their embrace of a normative perspective, Critical theorists make no claims
that their analyses are “objective” in the sense usually meant by logical positivists.
In fact, critical theorists ar gue that the subjective/objective dualism masks the
ways in which both positions are limited by the social forces that inform all
human action and analysis. Critical qualitative research acknowledges
subjectivism in the sense that learnings and interpretations cannot be based on
logic and scientific analysis only. While it affirms that knowledge can never be
separated completely from the researcher’s own experience, it rejects the notion
that all analyses are relative. It asserts that rational analysis is fundamental to
human emancipation, and hence embraces what Morrow (1994) calls critical
realism
Data analysis and verification
Critical researchers assume that their task is to expose the hidden assumptions
that guide both research respondent statements and often, initial analyses of data.
Researchers therefore bring a level of scrutiny to their task that includes rooting
out the meanings of what is left unsaid as well as that which is stated. The research
is verified as other members of the research community offer corroboration that
has come from their own research experiences.
Sample representativeness, typicality, and generalizability
In a response similar to that of constructivism, critical researchers employing
qualitative research would note that we are not seeking to explain the “typical”
person, but to analyze that person’s possibilities and limits within a culture. In
this approach, individuals are not seen as “types” or members of aggregate groups
(although they may be both of these). Individuals instead are approached as beings
that inhabit subject positions that are possible within a culture. Because individuals
are members of society and must act within the society , they share certain
understandings and meanings; if they did not, they could be considered insane,
which in societal terms is the designation given to persons whose social realities
have no seeming connection to those around them. 
Validity
The test of validity in the case of critical constructivist research is directly related
to its stated purpose of inquiry. The research is valid to the extent that the analysis
provides insight into the systems of oppression and domination that limit human
freedoms, and on a secondary level, in its usefulness in countering such systems.
Criticism
One of the charges against critical theory is its tendency toward elitism. With its
proponents’ commitment to the idea that research can bring about a better and
more equitable world, critics char ge that critical theorists tend to assume that
they are not only more capable of analyzing a situation than most; they are better
equipped to of fer a prescriptive plan of action. Critics char ge that this often
brings theorists outside of their realms of expertise so that the insights they offer
are naive and unworkable in the contemporary setting.
Further, critics char ge that critical theorists can be unwilling to listen to the
experiences of those most adversely affected by current policies and the status


--- Page 81 ---
81
Foundations of Qualitative
Research: Interpretativism
and Critical Theory
Paradigm
quo, as they tend to focus their analyses on persons and institutions in positions
of power and authority. This, critics note, causes critical theorists to be out of
touch with the very persons they purport to be most interested in helping.
Differences between critical theory framework and post-positivism on five major
issues are as given below:
Check Your Progress 2
1) Is critical framework a departure from post-positivism and interpretivism?
Give reasons in support of your answer?
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
2) What points should be kept in mind while defining the methodology of
critical research?
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
3) Critical framework is sometimes known as the Frankfurt school. Why?
Elaborate on the foundations of critical theory.
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
Nature of reality
Purpose of research
Acceptable methods
and data
Meaning of data
Relationship of
research to practice
Post-positivism
External to human
mind
Find Universals
Scientific method
Falsification
Use to test theory
Separate activities.
Research guides
practice
Critical Theory
Material and external to the
human mind.
Uncover local instances of
universal power relationships
and empower the oppressed.
Subjective inquiry based on
ideology and values; both
quantitative and qualitative
methods are acceptable.
Interpreted through ideology;
used to enlighten and
emancipate.
Integrated activities.
Research guides practice.
(Source: Foundations of qualitative research by Jerry W. Willis (2007))


--- Page 82 ---
82
Research Methodology:
Issues and Perspectives 5.4 APPLICATIONS IN RESEARCH:
ILLUSTRATIVE CASES
Case 1: ‘A study on ‘invisible’ labour-force in India
Invisible workforce comprises of care-workers who work daily for low/negligible
wages however their work is critical to the success of the household/enterprise.
Primarily constituting of housewives, nannies, cleaners, etc., these workers are
engaged in ‘care’ work and their work is generally under-valued or over-looked.
A news daily recently reported that as per Census 2011 figures nearly 160 million
women in India aged between 15-59 years reported themselves as not working
but were primarily involved in domestic work, care work and rearing families.
In this case, the social actors are the housewives, nannies, cleaners, etc.
An interpretive researcher by using qualitative methods like phenomenology
and symbolic interactionism would try to understand the root causes of such
women not involved in economic work. Research could begin with penning
down research questions like ‘why the women have not taken up work outside
home’ or ‘Are their social pressures for the women sticking to domestic work’ or
even ‘Is the decision to work at home independent or curbed’. Next, the researcher
can shortlist a region predominantly populated with invisible workers and use
techniques of PRA/RRA to gather the requisite data. The perspectives on invisible
work may dif fer among the social actors in this case too. For example if the
researcher is probing the causes of invisible work he may observe that causes
may be social, cultural or at times political too. It would be important to gather
perspectives of not only unpaid care-workers but also their family members as
to why they did not try to change their current situation, village head-men to
understand whether it is due to lack of economic opportunities in the area and
also to know whether illiteracy is the cause of invisibility of women workers.
Case 2: Absenteeism among students of primary school in rural areas
Universal primary education being one of the goals of Millennium Development
Goals of UNDP, all developing countries are in the race of providing elementary
and primary education to children in rural and urban areas. While enrolment in
elementary and primary education has definitely increased in India in the last
decade, but equally troublesome statistics have emerged quoting high incidence
of absenteeism among students of primary school in certain rural areas. An
interpretive researcher using qualitative methods and tools can take dif ferent
perspectives of the social actors (read primary school children, teachers and
parents) for absenteeism in primary schools.
Case 3: A study of employer ’s attitude towards distance/online-educated job
applicants.
Distance educated youth are perceived to be less efficient and trained as compared
to classroom educated youth. Instances of preferential bias have been observed
in this respect often in the job market. An in-depth study on the employer ’
s
mindset can be undertaken by an interpretive researcher to explore the causes of
the same. Extensive literature review is a pre-cursor to such research as that will
underpin the historical causes of preferential attitude and negative perception of
the employers. An interpretive researcher can employ actual observational
techniques or use witness accounts of the interviews/interactions of the employer
