--- Page 21 ---
21
Research Methodology:
Conceptual FoundationUNIT 2 APPROACHES TO SCIENTIFIC
KNOWLEDGE: POSITIVISM AND
POST POSITIVISM
Structure
2.0 Objectives
2.1 Introduction
2.2 Positivist Philosophy of Science
2.2.1 Central Tenets of Positivist Philosophy
2.3 Attack on Positivist Philosophy of Science
2.4 Karl Popper’s Philosophy of Science
2.5 Criticism against Karl Popper’s Philosophy of Science
2.6 Thomas Kuhn’s Philosophy of Science
2.7 Popper Versus K
uhn
2.8 Let Us Sum Up
2.9 Keywords
2.10 Some Useful Books
2.11 Answer or Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises
2.0 OBJECTIVES
After going through this unit, you will be able to:
• Describe the aim of science as a cognitive enterprise;
• Explain the basic ideas of positivism;
• Appreciate the arguments or criticisms leveled against positivist philosophy
of science;
• Explain the central tenets of Popper’s philosophy of science;
• State the fundamental differences between Popper’s and positivists’ views
about theory of scientific method;
• Assess Karl Popper’s philosophy of science;
• Describe the essentials of Kuhn’s philosophy; and
• Discuss the basic differences between the Popperian and the Kuhnian models
of science.
2.1 INTRODUCTION
Science has not only shaped our mode of living in the world but also our ways of
thinking about the world. It is for this reason it has acquired a central place in the
intellectual life of our times. Because of its central place in the modern culture,
three disciplines have emer ged which has made science itself their object of
inquiry. These three disciplines are: History of Science, Sociology of Science
and Philosophy of Science. Whereas science studies the world natural or social


--- Page 22 ---
22
Research Methodology:
Issues and Perspectives
or psychological, these three disciplines study science itself. History of Science
and Sociology of Science are essentially twentieth century disciplines. No doubt,
Philosophy of Science has a great past built by the contributions of individual
philosophies in different centuries. However, as a widespread and coordinated
discipline, it is also an essentially twentieth century phenomenon.
History of Science is a study of the development of scientific ideas and institutions
in a chronological order. Sociology of Science is the study of the relation between
social factors and forces on the one hand and the growth of scientific ideas and
institutions, on the other. In short, it is an inquiry into the relation between science
and society. History of Science deals with science as a historical phenomenon
and sociology of science is concerned with science as a social institution.
Philosophy of Science is a study of Science as a cognitive enterprise, that is, as a
knowledge-seeking activity. The enquiry we call Philosophy of Science addresses
questions like “What is the aim of Science?”, “What is the method of Science?”
In what sense, if any, is Science objective, rational and progressive?”
It is obvious that answers to questions such as these are of importance in figuring
out how if at all, and in what sense, if any, social sciences including Economics,
can claim to be scientific.
2.2 POSITIVIST PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE
Positivism (which is also called “logical positivism”) is a movement in Philosophy
of the first half of the 20th century. Positivists debunked the whole of traditional
Philosophy by attacking Metaphysics which was the most important branch of
Philosophy. Metaphysics was so central to Philosophy that Philosophy was
virtually identified with Metaphysics. Metaphysics sought to answer most general
and basic questions like “What is Ultimate Reality?” “Does God exist? And is
so what is God’ s relation with the world?”, “Is there a soul?”, “What is the
relation between the mind and the body?”, “Is man free or are human actions
determined?” etc., Positivists maintained that Metaphysics was a spurious
discipline because metaphysical statements (such as “Matter is Ultimate reality”
or “Ultimate Reality is Spiritual” etc.,) are meaningless since they are not
verifiable in experience. “A statement” they claimed “is meaningful if and only
if it is verifiable.” Apart from being anti-metaphysical, they were empiricists
i.e., according to them, experience is the source of knowledge. They called
themselves “Neo-Empiricists” to distinguish themselves from the Traditional
Empiricists of 17th and 18th centuries like Locke, Berkeley and Hume.
2.2.1 Central Tenets of Positivist Philosophy
In science we start with particular observations regarding what is the case. Using
the method of induction, we arrive at definitions which are statements about the
essential nature of things. We, then, using the method of deduction, on the basis
of definitions, arrive at demonstrations which show why things must be what
they are. Thus, the aim of science is two fold: Definition and Demonstration.
The method of science, broadly, is of two types: Induction and Deduction. All
science must proceed from “What is” given to us in particular observations to
“what must be” as shown by the demonstrations. The path of science is an arch
whose two end points are observation and demonstration.


--- Page 23 ---
23
Approaches to Scientific
Knowledge: Positivism and
Post Positivism
In the whole span of three centuries – from the beginning of the 17th century till
the end of the 19th century – two views stand out prominently as answer to the
question regarding the aim and method of science. The first view is called
Induction. The second view is called Hypothesisism, according to which the
method of science is the method of Hypothesis. Francis Bacon is the Father of
Inductivism and Rene Dercartes is the Father of Hypothesisism. The two views
provide two distinct models of scientific practice, which we may call Baconian
and Cartesian models of Scientific practice.
Positivists worked out a well-knit philosophy of science. Here are some of the
central tenets of the Positivist Philosophy of Science:
1) Science is qualitatively distinct from, superior to and ideal for all other
areas of human endeavor (Scientism).
2) The distinction, superiority and idealhood that Science enjoys is traceable
to its possession of method (Methodologism).
3) There is only one method common to all sciences, irrespective of their subject
matter (Methodological monism).
4) That method which is common to all sciences, natural or human, is the
method of Induction (Inductivism).
5) The hallmark of science consists in the fact that its statements are
systematically verifiable.
6) Scientific observations are or can be shown to be “pure” in the sense that
they are theory-free.
7) The theories are winnowed from facts or observations.
8) The relation between observation and theory is unilateral in the sense theories
are dependent on observations whereas observations are theory-independent.
9) To a given set of observation based statements, there corresponds uniquely
only one theory (just as from a given set of premises in an argument, only
one conclusion follows).
10) Our factual judgments are value-neutral and our value judgments have no
factual content (Fact-Value Dichotomy thesis); hence, science being the
foremost instance of factual inquiry, does not have value commitments.
11) That all scientific explanation must have the following pattern:
L1…………………………………….Ln
I2……………………………………….In
Therefore, E.
Where L1……………………………………..Ln is a set of laws, I2………………………………In is a
set of statements describing initial conditions and E is the statement
describing phenomenon to be explained. That is to say , to explain a
phenomenon scientifically is to deduce its description from a set of laws
(which are called “Covering Laws”) via a set of statements describing initial
conditions. In sum, all explanation worthy to be called ‘ scientific’ must
contain laws and involve deduction (Hence, this is called Deductive-
Nomologism where ‘nomological’ means ‘concerning laws’).


--- Page 24 ---
24
Research Methodology:
Issues and Perspectives
12) The aim of science is either economical description of phenomena or precise
prediction of facts and not providing an account of observations in terms of
unobservables. Hence, scientific theories are not putative descriptions of
the unobservable world. The aim of science has nothing to do with alleged
reality of such a world (Anti-Realism).
13) Unlike other areas of activity, science is progressive in the sense that scientific
change is always change for better, whereas other areas exhibit just change:
the progress of science consists in the accumulation of observations on the
one hand, and, cumulative growth of theories,on the other hand. The latter
means that any new theory includes the old theory(plus something). Thus
the growth of science essentially exhibits continuity.
14) Science is objective in the sense that its theories are based on ‘pure’
observations or facts which as theory free. Interpretations may be subjective
but observations/facts are objective because they are free from interpretation/
theory.
15) Science is rational because the principle of Induction which is central to the
method of science is rationally defensible, in spite of Hume’ s skepticism
regarding its rational defensibility.
Positivists tried to justify the principle of Induction by invoking the concept of
pure observation. According to them, theories are arrived at on the basis of the
Principle of Induction. If we can show that theories are very closely related to
pure observations, the Principle of Induction stands rationally justified. They
tried to work out a whole project to demonstrate rational justification of the
Principle of Induction on these lines.
2.3 ATTACK ON THE POSITIVIST PHILOSOPHY
OF SCIENCE
It must be noted that the concept of pure observation is necessary for positivist
philosophy of science for showing that science is objective and that science is
rational. Hence, the centrality of this concept to the positivist philosophy of
science. Therefore, the collapse of this concept to the positivist philosophy of
science though other theses of positivist philosophy of science listed above also
were demolished by its opponents. Let us briefly look at the ar guments which
demolished the positivist thesis of pure observations i.e., thesis at Sl.No.6 in the
list above.
Firstly, observations presuppose some principle of selection. We need relevant
observations. In science it is the problem that decides what is a relevant
observation and thus provides the principle of relevance. Hence, there can not
be observations without a – prior problem.
As Popper says “Before we can collect data, our interest in data of a certain kind
must be aroused; the problem always comes first”. It may be objected that we
become aware of the problems because of observations and hence observations
come first and therefore positivists are right. But this objection does not hold.
Two persons might make same observations but one may come out with a problem
and the other may not. Therefore, mere observations would not generate problems
in science. Usually problems are generated when there is a clash between what


--- Page 25 ---
25
Approaches to Scientific
Knowledge: Positivism and
Post Positivism
we observe and what we expect. Of the two persons making the same observations,
one comes out with a problem because he sees a conflict between what he observes
and what he expects whereas the other observer may have not expectation which
conflicts with what he observes. The former believes in a theory which produces
certain expectations which conflict with his observations and hence he comes
out with a problem. In other words, a – prior belief in a theory is necessary for a
problem to be generated and a – prior awareness of the problem is necessary for
making relevant observations. Thus, theory precedes observations.
Secondly, in science observations are taken into account only if they are described
in a language that is currently used in a particular science. An observation,
however, genuine, is no observation unless it is expressed in a recognized idiom.
It is the theory which provides the idiom or language to be used to describe facts
or observations. It is relevant to quote the words of Pierre Duhem, a distinguished
physicist and philosopher:
“Enter a laboratory. The table crowded with an assortment of apparatus: an electric
cell, silk covered copper wire, small cups of mercury, spools, a mirror mounted
on an iron bar; the experimenter is inserting into small openings the metal ends
of ebony-headed pins: the iron bar oscillates and the mirror attached to it throws
a luminous band upon a celluloid scale: the forward backward motion of this
spot enables the physicist to observe the minute oscillations of the iron bar. But
ask him what he is doing. Will he answer “I am studying the oscillations of an
iron bar which carries a mirror?” No, he will say that he is measuring the electrical
resistance of the spools. If you are astonished, if you ask him what his words
mean, what relation they have with the phenomenon he has been observing and
which you have noted at the same time as he, he will answer that your question
requires a long explanation and that you should take a course in electricity”.
Thirdly, most of the observations in science are made with the help of instruments.
These instruments are constructed or designed in accordance with the
specifications provided by some theories. These theories, one may say, form the
software of these instruments. Belief in the reliability of these instruments implies
the acceptance of these theories which has gone into the making of these
instruments. This observations presuppose prior acceptance of theories.
Fourthly, observations in science need to be legitimized i.e., ratified by a theory.
An example makes the point clear. We all know that Galileo used some telescopic
observations to support the Helio-centric theory against the geo-centric theory
of Ptolemy and his followers. His opponents did not consider the telescopic
observations adequate. Why did they not? No doubt, they had belief in the
reliability of telescope; they had no problem in using telescope for terrestrial
purposes i.e., making observations of earthly objects. They opposed the extension
of telescopic observations to the celestial sphere i.e., regarding heavenly bodies.
Their argument was that the normal factors like background and neighbourhood
which help our normal perceptions are absent in the sky. Further, it is impossible
to directly verify whether telescopic observations of heavenly bodies are accurate.
They rightly demanded from Galileo a theory of light which would justify the
extension of the telescope from terrestrial to celestial sphere. Galileo had no
such theory. But he rightly believed that such a theory could be provided in
future so that telescopic observations would get justification. Thus, while the
opponents of Galileo insisted that the telescopic observations be justified by an


--- Page 26 ---
26
Research Methodology:
Issues and Perspectives
optical theory at the same time as their acceptance, Galileo maintained that the
justification could be provided subsequent to their acceptance. It may be noted
that both sides accepted that the telescopic observations needed justification in
term of a theory of light.
All this does not mean that observations are theory-dependent whereas theories
are observation-independent. Observations and theory are interdependent though
it is not easy to clarify what the nature of this interdependence is. However ,
positivists were wrong in claiming that observations are theory –independent.
To say that observations are theory dependent is to say that observation is not a
passive reception but an active participation of our cognitive faculties equipped
with prior knowledge which we call theory. After all, observations are not ‘given’
but ‘made’.
Check Your Progress 1
1) What is the aim of science?
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
2) What do you mean by the term ‘inductivism’?
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
3) What are the features of hypothesis?
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
4) Match the following:
A B
i) The relation between observation i) Value judgments
and theory
ii) Factual inquiry under positivist ii) Precise prediction of facts
approach does not have
iii) The aim of Science is iii) Objective
iv) Science is iv) Unilateral


--- Page 27 ---
27
Approaches to Scientific
Knowledge: Positivism and
Post Positivism
5) Give two counter arguments against the positivist thesis of pure observation.
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................
2.4 KARL POPPER’S PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE
Karl Popper was the first to react against the positivist philosophy of science. In
fact he started attacking it quite early . But his attack on positivists and his
alternative to the positivist philosophy of science came to be widely known at
the beginning of the second half of the 20th century. Popper’s theory of science,
particularly his theory of scientific method has won a lot of admirers among
scientists and philosophers. As we know , positivists tried to work out a
sophisticated version of Inductivism . Popper worked out a sophisticated
version of Hypothesisism. We shall briefly consider his views on the nature of
science.
According to Popper , the central task of philosophy is not to solve Hume’ s
problem or problem of Induction as thought by Positivists. This is because (1)
the problem of Induction cannot be solved, and (2) it need not be solved because
the method of science is not the method of Induction. The central task of
philosophy of science, Popper maintains, is to solve what he calls the problem of
demarcation or Kant’ s problem i.e., the problem of identifying the line of
demarcation between science and non-science. Popper maintains that what
distinguishes science fr om the r est of our  knowledge is the systematic
falsifiability of scientific theories. This falsifiability is the line of demarcation
between science and non-science. Falsifiability is the criterion of scientificity. A
statement is scientific if and only it is falsifiable.
In accordance with what he considers to be the hallmark of scientific theories,
Popper puts forward what he considers to an adequate model of scientific method.
He characterizes his model of scientific method as Hypothetico-Deductive
model. According to him, the method of science is not method of Induction but
the method of Hypothetico-Deduction. What are the fundamental differences
between these methodological models”? Firstly, the inductivist model maintains
that our observations are theory-independent and therefore are indubitable.
That is to say , since observations ar e theor y-independent, they have
probability Value 1. It also says that our theories are only winnowed from
observations and therefore our scientific theories have the initial probability
value 1 in principle. Of course, inductivists admitted that in actual practice, the
theories may contain something more than what observation based statements
say, with the result that our actual theories may not have been winnowed from
observations.
Hence, the need for verification arises. Popper rejects the inductivist view that
our observations are theory-free and hence rejects the idea that our observation
statements have probability equal to 1. More importantly , he maintains that
theories are not winnowed from observations or facts, but are free creations of
human mind. Our scientific ideas, in other words, are not extracted from our
observations; they are pure inventions. Since our theories ar e our  own


--- Page 28 ---
28
Research Methodology:
Issues and Perspectives
constructions, not the functions of anything like pur e observations, which
according to Popper are anyway myths, the initial probability of our scientific
theories is zero.
From this it follows that whereas according to the inductivists what scientific
tests do is to mrely find out whether our scientific theories are true, according to
Popper scientific tests cannot establish the truth of scientific theories even when
the tests give positive results. If a test gives a positive result, the inductivists
claim that the scientific theory is established as true, whereas according to Popper
all that we calim is that our theory has not yet been falsified. In Popper’s scheme
no amount of positive result of scientific testing can prove our theories. Whereas
the inductivists speak of confirmation of our theories in the face of positive
results of the tests, Popper only speaks of corroboration. In other words, in the
inductivist scheme we can speak of scientific theories as established truths,
whereas in the Popperian scheme, a scientific theory, however, well supported
by evidence remains permanently tentative. We can bring out the fundamental
difference between verificationism (inductivism) and falsificationism
(Hypothetico-Deductivism) by drawing on the analogy between two systems of
criminal law. According to one system, the judge has to start with the assumption
that the accused is innocent and consequently unless one finds evidence against
him, he should be declared innocent. According to the other , the judge has to
start with the assumption that the accused is a culprit and consequently, unless
evidence goes in his favour, he should be declared to be a culprit. Obviously the
latter system of criminal law is harsher than the former. The inductivist scheme
is analogous to the former kind of criminal law , where as the Hypothetico-
Deductive scheme is akin to the latter one.
The steps of Scientific Procedure
In the Popperian scheme we begin with a problem, suggest a hypothesis as a
tentative solution, try to falsify our solution by deducing the test implications of
our solution, try to show that the implications are not borne out and consider our
solution to be corroborated if repeated attempts to falsify it fail. Thus, problem,
tentative solution, falsification and corroboration constitute the steps of scientific
procedure. Popper ’s theory of scientific method is called Hypothetico-
Deductivism because, according to him, the essence of scientific practice consists
of deducing the test implications of our hypothesis and attempting to falsify the
latter by showing that the former do not obtain, whereas according to Inductivism
the essence of scientific practice consists of searching for instances supporting
the generalization arrived on the basis of some observations and with the principle
of induction.
Popper claims that the Hypothetico-Deductive model of scientific method is
superior to inductivist model for the following reasons:
Firstly, it does justice to the critical spirit of science by maintaining that the aim
of scientific testing is to falsify our theories and by maintaining that our scientific
theories are, however corroborated, going to permanently remain tentative. In
other words, the Hypothetico-Deductivist view presents scientific theories as
permanently vulnerable with the sword of possible falsification always hanging
on their head. The inductivist view of scientific method makes science a safe
and defensive activity by portraying scientific testing as a search for confirming
instances and by characterizing scientific theories as established truths. According


--- Page 29 ---
29
Approaches to Scientific
Knowledge: Positivism and
Post Positivism
to Popper, the special status accorded to science is due to the fact that science
embodies an attitude which is essentially open-minded and anti-dogmatic.
Hypothetico-Deductivism is an adequate model of scientific practice because it
gives central place to such an attitude.
Secondly, Popper thinks that if science had followed the inductivist path; it would
not have made the progress it has. Suppose a scientist has arrived at a
generalization. If he follows the inductivist message, he will go in search of
instances which establish it as a truth. If he finds an instance which conflicts
with his generalization, what he does is to qualify his generalization saying that
the generalization is true except in the cases where it has to be held unsupported.
Such qualifications impose heavy restrictions on the scope of the generalization.
This results in scientific theories becoming extremely narrow in their range of
applicability. But if a scientist follows the Hypothetico-Dedectivist view, he will
throw away his theory once he comes across a negative instance instead of pruning
it and fitting it with the known positive facts. Instead of being satisfied with a
theory, tailored to suit the supporting observations, he will look for an alternative
which will encompass not only the observations which supported the old theory
but also the observations which went against the old theory and more importantly
which will yield fresh test implications. The theoretical progress science has
made can be explained only by the fact that science seeks to come out with
bolder and bolder explanations rather than taking recourse to the defensive method
of reducing the scope of the theories to make them consistent with facts. Hence,
Popper claims that the Hypothetico-Deductive model gives an adequate account
of scientific progress. According to him, if one accepts the inductivists account
of science one fails to give any explanation of scientific progress.
Thirdly, the Hypothetico-Deductive view according to Popper avoids the
predicament encountered by inductivist theory in the face of Hume’s challenge.
As we have seen, Hume conclusively showed that the principal of induction
could not be justified on logical grounds. If Hume is right, than science is based
upon an irrational faith. According to Hypothetico-Deductivist view , science
does not use the principle of induction at all. Hence, even though Hume is right,
it does not matter since science follows the Hypothetico-Deductivism are so
radically different that the latter in no way face any threat akin to the one faced
by the former. In this connection, he draws our attention to the logical asymmetry
between verification, the central component of the inductivist scheme, and
falsification, the central component of the Hypothetico-Deductivist scheme. They
are logically asymmetrical in the sense that one negative instance is suf ficient
for conclusively falsifying a theory, whereas no amount of positive instances are
sufficient for conclusively falsifying a theory , whereas no amount of positive
instances are sufficient to conclusively verify a theory. It may be recalled that
Hume was able to come out with the problem of induction precisely because a
generalization (all theories according to Inductivism are generalizations) cannot
be conclusively verified.
How does Popper characterize scientific progress? According to him, one finds
in the history of science invariable transitions from theories to better theories.
What does the work ‘better ’ stand for? It may be recalled that, according to
Popper, no scientific theory, however, corroborated can be said to be ‘true’. Hence,
Popper drops the very concept of truth and replaces it by the concept of
Verisimilitude (truth-likeness or truth-nearness) in his characterization of the


--- Page 30 ---
30
Research Methodology:
Issues and Perspectives
goal of science. In other words, through science cannot attain truth, i.e., though
our theories can never be said to be true, science can set for itself the goal of
achieving higher and higher degrees of Verisimilitude, i.e., successive scientific
theories can progressively approximate to truth. So, in science we go from theory
to better theory and the criterion for betterness is Verisimilitude. But what is the
criterion for Verisimilitude? The totality of the testable implications of a
hypothesis constitutes what he calls ‘the empirical content’ of the hypothesis.
The totality of the testable implications which are borne out constitute the truth
content of the hypothesis and the totality of the testable implications which are
not borne out is called the falsity content of the hypothesis. The criterion of the
Verisimilitude of a theory is nothing but truth content minus the falsity content
of a theory. In the actual history of science we always find, according to Popper,
theories being replaced by better theories, that is, theories with higher degree of
Verisimilitude. In other words, of the two successive theories, at any time in the
History of Science, we find the successor theory possessing greater Verisimilitude
and is therefore better than its predecessor. In fact, according to him, a theory is
rejected as false only if we have an alternative which is better than the one
at hand in the sense that it has more testable implications and a greater number
of its testable implications are already borne out. The growth of science is
convergent in the sense that the successful part of the old theory is retained in the
successor theory with the result the old theory becomes a limiting case of the
new one. The growth of science thus shows continuity. In other words, it is the
convergence of the old theory into the new one that provides continuity in the
growth of science. It must also be noted in this connection that unlike the
Inductivists or Positivists, Popper is a Realist  in the sense, according to him,
scientific theories are about an unobservable world. This means that the real
world of the unobservable thought can never be captured entirely by our theories,
evidence that through the gap between Truth and our theories can never be
completely filled, it can be progressively reduced. Consequently, the real world
of unobservable will be more and more like what our theories say though not
completely so.
How does Popper establish the objectivity of scientific knowledge? Inductivists
sought to establish the objectivity of science by showing that scientific theories
are based upon pure observations. The so-called ‘pure’  observations were
supposed to be absolutely theory-free. They are only ‘given’  and hence, free
from subjective interpretations. Popper, as we have seen, rightly rejects the idea
of pure observations. Consequently, he cannot accept the inductivist account of
the objectivity of science. What engenders scientific objectivity, according Popper,
is not the possibility of pure observation, but the possibility of inter-subjective
testing. In short, science is objective because it is public and it is public because
its claims are inter-subjectively testable.
To the question, “Which comes first, observation or theory?” the Inductivist
answers ‘observation’. Popper answers ‘earlier observation or earlier theory’.
To him the question is as illegitimate as the question, “which comes first, egg or
hen?” which can be answered only by saying ‘earlier egg or earlier hen?’
It will be convenient if we list the main theses of Popper’s philosophy of science
arranged in a manner with our list of the theses of the positivist philosophy of
science:
