--- Page 22 ---
 
 
 
114 
Free Trade versus 
Protectionism levied on goods like wheat, rice, fertilizers, cement, sugar, cloth etc. 
Specific duties are quite easy to administer, as they do not involve the 
evaluation of the goods. Imposition of specific duties enables the 
government to keep out of the complexities of prices. 
However, specific duties cannot be levied on high-valued goods such as 
diamonds, jewellery, watches, T.V. sets, motor cars, works of art like 
paintings etc. These articles can be taxed either based on weight, the 
surface area covered or the number of articles. 
b) 
 Ad Valorem Tariff: 
‘Ad Valorem’ is the Latin word that means ‘on the value.’  
When the duty is levied as a fixed percentage of the value of the traded 
commodity, it is called an Ad Valorem tariff. Such duties are levied on the 
products the value of which is disproportionately higher compared to their 
physical characteristics such as weight or measurement. These duties are 
more equitable as the costly goods, generally consumed by the rich, bear a 
greater burden of duty, while the cheaper goods bought by the poor, bear a 
lesser 
burden of tariff.  
c)  Compound Tariff: 
The compound tariff is a combination of specific and ad valorem tariffs. 
The compound tariff includes specific duty on each unit of the 
commodity along with a percentage of ad valorem duty. Compound 
tariffs bring a greater elasticity to revenues. They also ensure more 
effective protection for domestic industries. 
2) 
 Classification based on the Purpose which a Tariff serves: 
Based on the purpose that tariff serves, Tariffs can be of two types: 
a) Revenue Tariff and 
b) Protective Tariff. 
a) Revenue Tariff: 
Sometimes the intention of the government behind imposing tariffs is 
revenue generation. Especially in developing countries, the government 
sometimes rely on tariffs as a source of revenue. 
However, many times imposing tariffs also doesn't generate revenue. 
Tariff imposition may also lead to a shift of consumer demand from 
imported goods to domestic products, thus reducing the tariff collection. 
Usually, the rate of revenue tariff is kept low so that the revenue generated 
from the tariff is not curtailed because of reduced imports. 
 


--- Page 23 ---
 
 
 
115 
Instruments of 
Protectionism b)  Protective Tariff: 
When the purpose behind the imposition of a tariff is the protection of 
domestic industries from foreign competition, the tariff is called a 
protective tariff. As against revenue tariff, the rate of protective tariff is 
kept higher to reduce the imports. When the tariff rate is higher the 
protective effect of the tariff is also greater. A perfect protective tariff will 
prohibit imports. However, a case against protective tariffs is that because 
of zero competition from foreign producers, domestic producers will 
become inefficient and they might not be able to face competition even in 
long run.  
3) 
 Classification based on Discrimination: 
Tariff systems can be classified into three categories based on their 
application in different countries. 
a) Single-Column tariff 
b) Double-Column tariff 
c) Triple-Column tariff 
a)  Single-Column Tariff: 
The Single-Column Tariff also known as the uni-linear tariff system 
provides  uniform tariff rates to all commodities irrespective of the 
country of origin. It is a simple tariff system and is easy to administer. 
It is a non-discriminatory tariff which sometimes becomes inelastic to 
adjust to the changing needs of the domestic industries. 
b)  Double-Column tariff:  
Different tariff rates are charged for different countries in the Double-
Column tariff system.  The double-column tariff system is divided into 
two different types of tariffs: (a) General and conventional tariffs. The 
legislature fixes the general schedule fixes the general schedule at the 
very start while the conventional schedule is based on commercial 
treaties with other countries. (b) There are two autonomously 
determined schedules of tariff-the maximum and the minimum.  
The minimum schedule applies to those countries who have taken the 
MFN (most favoured nation) pledge or signed an agreement. The 
maximum schedule applies to all other countries.  
c)  Triple-column tariff:   
The triple-column tariff system consists of three autonomously 
determined tariff schedules-the general, the intermediate and the 
preferential. The general and intermediate tariff rates are like the 
maximum and minimum rates mentioned above under the Double-


--- Page 24 ---
 
 
 
116 
Free Trade versus 
Protectionism Column tariff system. Preferential tariffs were once imposed between 
nations and their colonies.  
4)  Classification based on Products: 
Tariffs can be classified on the basis whether a product is imported or 
exported. On this basis, the tariffs can be of two types: 
a) Import duties and 
b) Exports duties. 
a)  Import Duties: 
If the home country imposes a tariff upon the products of foreign 
countries as they are imported, the tariff is known as an import tariff or 
import duty. 
b)  Export Duties: 
Export duties are imposed on the commodities exported to be sold in 
foreign market, it is called an export tariff or export duty. 
6.2.2 Effective Rate of Protection 
Tariffs can be imposed on both final goods and intermediate goods as well. 
Tariffs on raw materials and intermediates impact the cost of production for 
domestic industry. Thus, we must consider tariff on raw material while assessing 
the extent of protection provided to the domestic industry in prevailing tariff 
structure. The extent of protection granted to the domestic industry by the given 
structure of nominal tariff rates is measured by the Effective Rate of protection 
(ERP). Under free trade, value added in the domestic industry would be 
determined by world market prices of the final good and imported inputs. And 
thus, effective rate of protection will be same as tariff rate. Also, if production of 
the final good does not need any intermediate goods, then the ERP equals the 
nominal rate of tariff on the final good. When a tariff is imposed, domestic prices 
can exceed the world market prices. Here, domestic value added and ERP would 
depend on the extent of price increase of the final good vis-à-vis that of 
intermediates along with the need of the intermediate goods in the production 
process. 
ERP measures the change in value added in the domestic industry due to tariff 
protection. By definition, 
ERPF 
= (VT-VW)/VW, 
ERPF is the ERP on the final good F; V T is a value-added in the production of F 
after tariff; and V W, is a value-added in the production of F at world market 
prices, i.e. VW is the value added under 'free trade'. Remember, value added is the 
difference between the price of the 'final good produced by an industry, less the 
cost of inputs required per unit of production of the final good.  


--- Page 25 ---
 
 
 
117 
Instruments of 
Protectionism Let us consider a few examples to understand the concept of ERP clearly. 
Consider a final good F whose world market price is Rs.10000. To produce one 
unit of F, you require one unit of an intermediate good I, whose world market 
price is Rs.5000. Thus Vw, in this case, is Rs.5000 (i.e. 10000-5000).  
Case 1 Suppose a tariff of 20% is imposed on the final good F, while there is no 
tariff on the intermediate, I. Assuming a small open economy, post tariff, the 
price of F in the domestic market rises by 20% (to Rs.12000) and V T is Rs. 7000 
(i.e., 12000-5000). Hence ERP is 40% [i.e. ((7000
-5000) / 5000)* 100, which is 
much higher than the nominal rate of protection of 20%.  
Case 2  Suppose there is no tariff on the final good F and a tariff of 10% is 
imposed on intermediate I. The small economy assumption means there will be 
no change in the world market price of I after the tariff, while its domestic price 
will increase by 10% (to Rs.5500). Now, V T is Rs. 4500 (i.e., 10000-5500) and 
ERP is - 10% [i.e. ((4500 -5000) / 5000) * 100]. 
Following points can be kept in mind regarding ERP: 
 if production of the final good does not need any intermediate goods, then the 
ERP will be equal to the nominal rate of tariff on the final good.  
 if the tariff on final goods is higher than that on intermediate goods, then the 
ERP would be higher than the nominal rate of protection.  
 ERP could be negative when tariffs on imports are too high compared to the 
tariff on the final good. When ERP is negative, it means that tariffs are 
reducing domestic value added as compared to free trade. 
The measurement of ERP sometimes gets difficult because various inputs with 
different tariff rates are used to produce one commodity. Some other limitations 
of the concept of ERP is that it assumes fixed coefficients of production which do 
not allow for factor substitution possibilities. Also, the assumption of small open 
economy which cannot 
influence world prices is sometimes unrealistic. 
Check Your Progress 1 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1) Consider the following cases and describe whether ERP will be higher, lower 
or equal to the nominal rate of tariff: 
Case I: If the production of the final good requires no 
intermediates:_______________ 
Case II: If the tariff on final goods is higher than that on 
intermediates:______________ 
Case III: If the tariff on intermediate goods is higher than that on final goods. 
 


--- Page 26 ---
 
 
 
118 
Free Trade versus 
Protectionism 2) Differentiate between Single column tariffs and double-column tariffs. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) List different categories of tariff barriers. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
6.2.3  Economic Impact of Import Tariff in partial equilibrium 
analysis 
Using Figure 6.1, we will examine the impact of a tariff on various economic 
agents like consumers, producers and the government in a partial equilibrium 
framework. We assume that the country is a small open economy that cannot 
affect world market prices. This assumption implies that the tariff leaves the 
world market price of the good unaffected while raising its price in the domestic 
market. In Figure 6.1, we consider the domestic demand and supply curves of the 
imported good. The world market price of the good is P w, which would prevail in 
the domestic market under free trade. Thus,
 with free trade, domestic production 
of the good would be Q 1, domestic demand Q 2, and the difference Q 1 Q2 would 
be imported. A specific tariff rate of t per unit drives a wedge between the world 
price and the domestic market price of the imported good. Post-tariff prices in the 
domestic market rise to (P w + t). As a result, domestic production increases from 
Q1 to Q3 while consumption falls from Q2 to Q4.  
Now let us consider the costs imposed by the tariff. Owing to the tariff, domestic 
consumers suffer a loss in consumer surplus equal to the area (a + b + c + d), 
compared to free trade. This loss arises because consumers must now pay a 
higher price (P w + t) for the good and also because they now consume Q 4Q2 
amount less of the good than with free trade. However, domestic producers gain 
from the price rise, with the area representing the increase in producer surplus. 
The government also gains from the tariff as it earns revenue. The imports are 
now Q3Q4 units, each paying a tariff of t per unit, so the tariff revenue is given by 
the rectangle with area c. The loss to consumers exceeds the gain to producers 
and the government taken together, indicating that the tariff results in a net social 
loss to society equal to the sum of areas b and d. In Figure 6.1,
 Area b measures 
the loss in social welfare from the production distortion due to the tariff. It 
represents the higher cost of producing Q 1Q3 domestically rather than importing 
this amount; Area d is the welfare loss due to the consumption distortion created 
by the tariff. It represents the cost of not consuming Q 4Q2, an amount whose 
value to consumers exceeds the cost of importing it.  


--- Page 27 ---
 
 
 
119 
Instruments of 
Protectionism You should note that our partial equilibrium analysis of the impact of a tariff 
focuses simply on the market for the imported good. Repercussions on several 
important issues like terms of trade, BOP, factor markets etc., are left out of this 
framework, as in the case of our analysis of the benefits of free trade. In 
particular, our analysis does not attach any weight to employment in the sector 
being granted tariff protection. If the import-competing sector accounts for a 
significant share of total employment, the measures of welfare loss would have to 
be adjusted accordingly. In reality, employment is often the most important 
reason underlying the imposition of protectionist trade policies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source:  Figure 6.3 in Sikdar (2003) 
Figure 6.1: Economic impact of Import tariff in a partial Equilibrium analysis 
6.2.4  General Equilibrium Analysis: Impact of Tariff on Volume 
of Trade and Terms of Trade (TOT) 
When a country imposes a tariff, not only a specific product or sector but 
every sector of the economy gets affected in one way or the other. Import 
tariff changes the production and the consumption of other goods which in 
turn affect the composition of production and the allocation of resources 
across different sectors. Eventually, the volume of trade changes 
correspondingly. Further, a change in the Volume of trade may change the 
country's TOT (depending upon the size of the country and how the 
government spends the tax revenue). Let us examine the impact of the tariff 
on the Volume of trade and Terms of trade (TOT) in a small country and a 
large country.  
1) General Equilibrium Analysis of Tariff in a Small Country: 
When the tariff-imposing country is small, the domestic price of the 
importable commodity will rise by the full amount of tariff for the individual 
Pw +t 
P 
Pw 
Q 
Q1 
 Q 3 
 Q4 
 Q2 
B2 
D 
S 
d 
c 
b 
a 
O 


--- Page 28 ---
 
 
 
120 
Free Trade versus 
Protectionism consumers and producers in that small tariff-imposing country. The 
international price of the commodity will, however, remain unaffected. Let us 
assume that a small economy produces two commodities: Machinery (being 
imported) and textiles (being exported). When an import tariff is imposed, it 
will increase the price of machinery, which will encourage domestic 
production. But, if all the resources are fully employed, expansion in the 
production of machinery will require contraction in the production of textiles. 
Thus an import tariff will expand the machinery sector and contracts the 
export sector. On the other hand, the higher domestic price of machinery will 
shift consumption from machinery to textiles. Consequently, both the volume 
of exports and the volume of imports will decline. Thus the Volume of trade 
will fall. 
Import tariff leads to welfare losses for a small country on two fronts: 1. 
Import tariff reallocates the resources from exporting the commodity to 
importing the commodity in which the country has a comparative 
disadvantage. 2. It alters the consumption pattern of the consumers as they 
have to pay a higher price for importing goods. 
The general equilibrium analysis of tariffs in the case of a small country can 
be understood with the help of Fig. 6.2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.2:  General Equilibrium Analysis of Tariff in a Small Country 
In Fig. 6.2., the production possibility curve related to two commodities Textile 
and Machinery is AB. Under the assumptions of CRS technology and 
diminishing marginal productivities, PPF is drawn strictly concave downwards.  
Initially, in the case of free international trade, P 1P1 is the international exchange 
ratio line and the production equilibrium point is E. 
The consumption equilibrium point is R 1 which lies on the community 
indifference curve C1. In this situation, country A exports OE quantity of textiles 
E1 
R2 
O1 
R1 
E 
C1 
C2 
A 
B 
P1 
Textiles 
(Exportable) 
Machinery 
(Importable) 
P2 
P1 
O 


--- Page 29 ---
 
 
 
121 
Instruments of 
Protectionism and imports OR1 quantity of machinery. If a tariff is imposed but the world prices 
of commodities remain the same, the international exchange ratio line is P 2E1, 
parallel to the original international exchange ratio line P1P1. 
Now production equilibrium shifts to E 1 where country A produces a large 
quantity of domestic machinery (importable goods). This is the production or 
protective effect of tariffs. The consumption equilibrium shifts from R 1 to 
R2 where the international exchange ratio line P 2E1 becomes tangent to a lower 
community indifference curve C2. 
It shows that tariff has caused a reduction in the welfare of the tariff-imposing 
small country. The shift in consumption point from R 1 to R 2 sign ifies the 
consumption effect of the tariff. After the tariff, the country exports the O 1E1 
quantity of textiles and imports the R2O1 quantity of machinery. Both exports and 
imports are smaller than the free trade levels. Thus, tariffs for a small country is 
welfare reducing. 
2) General Equilibrium Analysis of Tariff in a Large Country: 
For a large tariff-imposing country, a tariff changes its TOT along with VOT. 
If the tariff-imposing country is large, reduced demand for imports due to 
tariff imposition may reduce the world demand for the concerned commodity 
to a great extent. Since the extent of reduced demand is high, it may reduce 
the international price of the concerned commodity. Thus, the price of an 
exporting commodity remains unchanged while that of importing commodity 
falls. This will cause a change in the international price ratio and will bring an 
improvement in the terms of trade of the tariff-imposing large country. 
The production effect, consumption effect and terms of trade effect due to 
tariff can be explained through Fig. 6.3. Continuing with the example in 
Figure 6.2, a country produces two commodities: Machinery (being imported) 
and textiles (being exported) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.3: 
General Equilibrium Analysis of Tariff in a Large Country 
O1 
R2 
R1 
R3 
E1 
E 
C3 
C1 
C2 
A 
B 
P1 
Textiles 
(Exportable) 
Machinery  
(Importable) 
P1 
P2 


--- Page 30 ---
 
 
 
122 
Free Trade versus 
Protectionism When a large country imposes a tariff, the World price of the importable 
commodity falls (while the price of the exportable commodity is the same), 
shifting the international exchange price line to P 3E1. As you can observe in 
Figure 6.3, price line P 3E1 is steeper than the exchange ratio line P 1P1 or P2E1. It 
simply means that the country can now buy its imports cheaper and sell its 
exports at the same price. 
In this case, the production equilibrium occurs at E 1 and consumption 
equilibrium occurs at R 3 where P 3E1 becomes tangent to the higher community 
indifference curve C3. The large tariff-imposing country imports R3O1 quantity of 
machinery and exports O 1E1 quantity of textiles. A higher ratio of imports to 
exports indicates that the terms of trade have become favourable for the tariff 
imposing-country A. 
The large country experiences production or protective effect as the domestic 
production of machinery increases owing to a shift in the production equilibrium 
from E to E 1. Although, increased domestic production required the reallocation 
of resources the country has gained because of positive consumption and terms of 
trade effects.  
The large country also experiences a welfare effect despite a reduction in 
specialisation and reallocation of resources towards import-substitute production. 
The welfare effect is reflected in the shift of consumption equilibrium to the 
highest community indifference curve C 3. This is the positive consumption 
effect. Thus, large country imposing tariff benefits from the favourable TOT, 
despite the reduction in the volume of international trade. 
Check
 Your Progress 2 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Describe the economic impact of Import tariff in a partial Equilibrium 
analysis. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) What is the Impact of tariff on the Volume of trade and Terms of trade (TOT) 
in the case of a small country? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 


--- Page 31 ---
 
 
 
123 
Instruments of 
Protectionism 3) Does a large country gain or lose from imposing a tariff? Justify. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
6.3  EXPORT SUBSIDIES 
Export subsidies are government policies that are implemented to encourage the 
export of goods by incentivizing local producers through easy and cheaper loans, 
direct payments, tax benefits etc. Like a tariff, an export subsidy can be either 
specific i.e. a fixed sum per unit or ad valorem i.e. the proportion of value 
exported. When the government provides an export subsidy, producers export up 
to a point where the domestic price is greater than the foreign price by the 
amount of subsidy. While export subsidies indeed help increase exports, there are 
costs associated with them. The effects of export subsidies on producers, 
consumers and the economy are explained in Figure 6.4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source:  Figure 
6.4 in Sikdar (2003) 
Figure 6.4: Effects of an export subsidy 
When a country provides subsidies to exporters, the price will rise from P w to Ps. 
At the same time, the price in importing countries falls from P s to P a., thus the 
price rise is less than the subsidy. In the exporting country, consumer loss is the 
area a+b in Figure 6.4 as they have to pay higher. Producers' gain is reflected in 
the area a+b+c; the government subsidy is the area b+c+d+e+f+g. The net 
welfare loss is, therefore the sum of the area b+d+e+f+g. Also, unlike in the case 
of tariff, export subsidies worsens the terms of trade by lowering the International 
d 
a` 
 b 
 c 
e 
 f 
 g 
Pa 
Pw 
Ps 
  Price (P) 
Exports 
 Quantity (Q) 
S 
D 
