--- Page 12 ---
 
 
 
104 
Free Trade versus 
Protectionism 4) State whether following statements are True or False. 
a) Import quota can also be called the unilateral quota. 
b) Voluntary export restraints are imposed by importing country itself. 
c) The raging war at WTO nowadays between developed and developing 
countries is about import quotas. 
d) Tariffs are the most popular policy measure by which governments across 
the world have been interfering with the movement of goods between 
countries. 
5.4 ECONOMIC AND NON-ECONOMIC 
ARGUMENTS FOR PROTECTIONISM 
At different times, several economic and non -economic arguments in favour of 
protection policies were put forward by economists to justify the protected trade. 
Some of those arguments are widely accepted and recognized, however, others 
are rejected outrightly as they proved to be fallacious.  
5.4.1 Economic Arguments  
The economic arguments mainly focus on strengthening industrialisation and 
protecting balance of payment from deterioration. The six common economic 
arguments in favour of protectionism policies are: 
Infant Industry 
Protectionist policies are advocated to protect the infant industry from foreign 
exporters. The infant industries refer to small & young industries which lack the 
experience and expertise to face the competition from established foreign 
industries. Such sectors have high operating costs in the initial stages of their 
growth so it becomes highly difficult for such industries to compete with foreign 
exporters. For example, developing countries like India, Bangladesh, Pakistan, 
and Sri Lanka often use the excuse of infant industry to impose trade barriers to 
compete in the international market. Thus, such industries require protection 
through suitable tariff policies to survive and develop in the long run. The core of 
this argument can be understood with this saying- Nurse the baby, protect the 
child, and free the adult‟. This underlines the significance of protecting domestic 
industries temporarily until they mature enough to compete against the foreign 
competition without protection.  
However, most of these industries never become mature enough to compete with 
foreign industries as they do not want these benefits to go away and thus demand 
the continuation of protection. Mainly for political reasons, it becomes an uphill 
task for any government to remove protections from infant industries. The critics 
of this argument emphasized that trade barriers should be imposed temporarily 
and phased out once the local industries mature enough to compete with foreign 
exporters.  


--- Page 13 ---
 
 
 
105 
Policies of 
Protectionism Diversification of Industries 
Protectionism policy plays a significant role in diversifying domestic industries, 
especially in developing countries. Any country needs to diversify its industrial 
structure in the long run as the risk of losing foreign markets reduces. 
Protectionist policies help diversify industries, increasing trade in the long run. 
This argument laid emphasis on self-sufficiency. 
Employment Generation & Protection 
Economists advocate protectionism as it helps in creating and protecting jobs in a 
country. Domestic industries should be given protection in order to deal with the 
dynamics of the global economy such as inflation because local industries 
produce more jobs than foreign industries. For example, developing countries use 
trade barriers to protect employment in that country which is vulnerable to 
efficient foreign labour. 
However, the protectionist policies or „beggar -my-neighbour high-tariff policy 
can create employment only in the short run until other countries reciprocate. So, 
this argument is fallacious and not convincing as the foreign employment 
opportunities reduce by limiting imports, and only through export surplus jobs 
cannot be preserved for a long time.  
“Pauper Labour” Argument 
Sometimes Protectionist policies are favored by the advanced countries to 
safeguard employment because the less developed and developing countries have 
cheaper labour, providing such countries with an unfair advantage. In the absence 
of protectionist policies, such countries stand to gain more and promote unfair 
competition in the market. Therefore, it becomes essential to protect the domestic 
industries from “pauper labour” countries so that hig her wages and higher 
standards of living in developed countries could be maintained. However, the 
“Pauper Labour” Argument overlooks
 that labour is not the only factor  of 
production. The rise in the productivity of labour does not necessarily imply an 
increase in the cost of production. For instance, the pauper labour country uses 
labour-intensive techniques that  may have low  productivity, increasing 
production costs.  
Balance of Trade (BOT) Disequilibrium 
Protectionism policies have been favoured since World War II to correct the 
Balance of Trade (BOT) disequilibrium. Tariff policy could be used to create or 
maintain favorable Balance of trade. Some countries always run a deficit in their 
BOT, meaning their imports exceed exports. Thus, import tariffs are imposed to 
create a favorable Balance of trade. In other words, when there is an excess of 
imports over exports that country is highly dependent on imports thereby a 
favorable BOT could be maintained by imposing import tariffs. As a result of 
which, a surplus will create in the BOT of that country. However, this argument 
is also fallacious. Neither exporter nor importer would gain if all countries follow 
such a policy at the same time.  


--- Page 14 ---
 
 
 
106 
Free Trade versus 
Protectionism Anti-Dumping Regulations 
Protectionist policies are advocated to resist dumping practices. A government 
may resort to anti-Dumping tariffs on the ground that the exporting country is 
selling a product in the home market at a lower price than in the overseas market. 
Dumping refers to the price discrimination policy where the seller discriminates 
between domestic and overseas buyers by selling at lower prices in the overseas 
market than the home market. Dumping may be resorted temporarily or 
persistently, driving out competition in the market where the product is dumped. 
For example, Japanese cameras are more affordable in New York than Japan. 
Therefore, the tariffs may be justified to prevent the adverse effects of dumping. 
The WTO justifies anti-dumping tariffs since such practices affect the local 
producers of similar or substitute products. The consumers stand to gain from 
dumping only in the short run. In long run, this could be proved fatal for the local 
producers but benefits the foreign suppliers The industries adopt this protectionist 
policy to capture the market share in offshores or unloading the excessive 
production.  
5.4.2 Non-Economic Arguments  
Having explained the economic arguments, let us briefly overview non-economic 
arguments for the protectionism policies. The non-economic arguments are 
political in nature. The most common three non-economic arguments are 
explained below: 
Defence Argument  
From the security concerns, self-sufficiency should be attained by every country. 
Over-dependence on other nations could be proved fatal in war times. For 
example, considering this concern, India has covered the defence & aerospace 
sector under „Make in India‟ for „Atmanirbhar Bharat‟ by pushing the indigenous 
manufacturing infrastructure.   
Swadeshi 
Argument 
Every citizen should vouch for Swadeshi products to support their economy as 
supporting Swadeshi will inject the feeling of patriotism and strengthen the 
economy. It generates more employment in the country by boosting the domestic 
industry which will further help the economy to grow & prosper.  In India, being 
„Vocal for local‟ initiative is an example of promoting indigenous goods. Every 
citizen must prefer homemade (swadeshi) goods to foreign goods. So, Swadeshi 
products need to be protected through a suitable tariff policy. 
Preservation Argument 
Protectionist policies are also advocated to preserve certain occupations such as 
the agricultural sector. In every economy, the agricultural industry has always 
been the pillar that is why it is highly protected by tariff policy across both 
developed and developing worlds. When agricultural industries or farmers stand 


--- Page 15 ---
 
 
 
107 
Policies of 
Protectionism to lose from the falling import prices, then countries charge tariffs. For example, 
in 1819, during Napoleon War, England levied tariffs on wheat to save the 
peasantry and prevent the production of grains.  
5.5 ARGUMENTS AGAINST PROTECTIONISM 
After understanding the reasons for Protectionism, let  us now discuss the 
arguments against protectionism. 
Reduces World Production and Consumption 
The tariffs on imported goods put the exporting country at disadvantage. As 
they have attained a cost advantage in producing such goods and despite 
being efficient in producing them, they are not allowed to trade due to the 
policy of protectionism. So, trade barriers limit the world‟s prod uction and 
consumption of goods and services. 
Consumers offered inferior quality goods 
Protectionist policies affect the welfare of local consumers. Owing to 
protected trade, efficient foreign firms could not offer high-quality products 
at a reasonable rate. In order to protect domestic industries, governments 
often forced the consumer to buy local products of low quality at higher 
prices. So, the local consumers welfare gets neglected while enforcing trade 
protectionism policies. 
Shields Weak Domestic Industries 
It is often argued that trade barriers shield the inefficient local industries 
which are vulnerable to foreign competition. Protectionism policies are being 
given to new and small industries which will take time to become efficient in 
production and reap the benefits of economies of scale. So, these firms are 
protected to become efficient in the long run but for now, such firms lack 
efficiency in the production of goods. That is why economists have said that 
protectionism shields weak domestic industries. 
Promotes Conflicts and Trade Wars  
Several economists argued that tariffs affect local consumers and create 
distortions in the market. As a tool of protectionism, tariff causes a hike in the 
price of imported goods. Therefore, consumers would shift away from expensive 
imported goods and prefer to buy domestic goods which is relatively cheaper. 
Another concern related to tariff is that it leads to a trade war. As countries would 
retaliate and impose tit-for-tat tariffs on their respective exports. Ultimately, the 
consequences of tariffs are borne by the imposing country‟s consumers, not the 
exporting. For instance, under the Trump administration, steep tariffs were 
imposed on billion-dollar goods from China, the EU, Canada, and Mexico. All 
these countries retaliated with tariffs on a range of US products.
  


--- Page 16 ---
 
 
 
108 
Free Trade versus 
Protectionism Check Your Progress 3 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  What do you understand by infant industry? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) What is anti-dumping practice? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) What do you mean by Balance of Trade disequilibrium? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
4) Enumerate the case for protectionism. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
5) Why the governments should not resort to protectionism policy? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
5.6  LET US SUM UP 
In this unit, we discussed about Free trade benefits all but Protectionism, if 
adopted may or may not benefit all. However, countries do not always adopt free 
trade policy. Because of protectionism policies, the inefficient industry gets 
protected, promoting inefficiency in the system. We also presented Economic 
and non-economic arguments for protectionism. 


--- Page 17 ---
 
 
 
109 
Policies of 
Protectionism 5.7  KEY WORDS 
Tariffs Duty levied on imported goods. 
Free Trade Absence of restrictions on export and import. 
Subsidies Direct or indirect financial assistance from 
governments to certain sectors to enhance their 
competitiveness.   
Voluntary Export Restraints Self-imposed restriction on the export quantity 
of a good that is permitted to export to another 
country. 
Quotas A non-tariff barrier which restrict the 
quantitative amount of a product allowed to be 
imported into or exported out of a country.  
Non-Tariff Barriers Barriers other than tariffs that restrict the 
foreign trade. 
Dumping The underpricing of exports, usually below 
cost or below the home country price.  
Protectionist Policies Government controls or measures such as 
tariffs, quotas, and subsidies to restrict 
international trade so that local industries can 
be shielded or protected from foreign 
competition. 
Balance of Trade Difference between the merchandise exports 
and imports. 
Trade creation A situation where trade with non-member 
countries get increased after the formation of 
free trade or other regional groupings. 
Trade Diversion A situation where trade with non-member 
countries is diverted to member countries as an 
outcome of the formation of a regional 
grouping. 
5.8  SOME USEFUL REFERENCES 
Abboushi, Suhail. “Trade protectionism: reasons and outcomes.” 
Competitiveness Review: An International Business Journal (2010). 
Arvind Panagari ya, “Return of Protectionism,” Economic Times , February  
12, 2018. 
Baldwin, Robert E., and Richard K. Green. “The effects of protection on 
domestic output.” Trade Policy Issues and Empirical Analysis 
(1988): 205- 231 


--- Page 18 ---
 
 
 
110 
Free Trade versus 
Protectionism Mahajan, Ashwani et al. (2018), “WTO Co mpliant Protectionism With Special 
Reference to China.” Pacific Business Review International, 11(6), 88-98. 
McGee, Robert W. (1996), “The philosophy of trade protectionism, its costs and 
its implications.” Policy Analysis 10. 
Milner, H. V. (1989), “An Alternative to Free Trade or Protectionism: Why 
Corporations Seek Strategic Trade Policy”, California Management Review , 
XXXI (4), 111-31. 
Remya Nair, “Customs Duty Raised on Electronic Goods,” The Mint, December 
16, 2017. 
Sharan, V. (1981),”Non -Tariff Barriers in International Trade and India‟s 
Exports”, Journal of Social and Economic Studies, IX (2), 295-304. 
5.9  ANSWERS/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES  
Check your progress 1 
1) Refer to section 5.2.1 
2) Refer to section 5.2.1 
3) Refer to section 5.2  
4) a) True           b) True              c) False              d) True 
Check your progress 2 
1) Refer to section 5.3 
2) Refer to section 5.3 
3) Refer to section 5.3 
4) a) True            b) False             c) False              d) True 
Check your progress 3 
1) Refer to section 5.4.1 
2) Refer to section 5.4.1 
3) Refer to section 5.4.1 
4) Refer to section 5.4 
5) Refer to section 5.5 
 


--- Page 19 ---
 
 
 
111 
Instruments of 
Protectionism UNIT 6 INSTRUMENTS OF PROTECTIONISM  
Structure 
6.0 Objectives 
6.1 Introduction 
6.2    Tariff Barriers 
        6.2.1 Classification of Tariffs 
     6.2.2 Effective rate of protection 
     6.2.3 Economic Impact of Import Tariff in partial equilibrium analysis 
6.2.4 General Equilibrium Analysis: Impact of Tariff on Volume of Trade 
and Terms of Trade (TOT) 
6.3 Export subsidy 
6.4 Non Tariff barriers 
 6.4.1 Import Quota 
 6.4.2 Voluntary Export Restraint 
 6.4.3 Other Non-tariff Barriers 
6.5 Let us Sum Up 
6.6 Key Words 
6.7 Some Useful Books 
6.8 Answers/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises  
6.0  OBJECTIVES 
After studying this Unit, you should be able to:  
 explain various tariff and non-tariff barriers;  
 identify the economic impact of Import tariff in partial equilibrium analysis; 
 explain the effect of a tariff on production and consumption; 
 describe export subsidy and its impact on the economy; 
 identify the welfare effects of an export subsidy on producer and consumer 
groups and the government in the exporting country; 
 calculate the national and world welfare effects of an export subsidy; and 
 explain various quantitative restrictions in international trade. 
                                                 
 Adapted from Unit 4 of the course MEC 004 written by Dr. Ananya Ghosh Dastidar 


--- Page 20 ---
 
 
 
112 
Free Trade versus 
Protectionism 6.1   INTRODUCTION 
In unit 5, we discussed free trade and protectionism. Free trade allows imports 
and exports without tariffs or other trade barriers. At the same time, 
protectionism imply restrictions imposed on international trade to protect 
domestic industries. The idea behind protectionist policies is to benefit the 
domestic producers. We also discussed about benefits and costs associated with 
protectionism. In present unit, we will discuss about instruments of 
protectionism. The tools of trade protection that countries typically use to restrict 
imports can be broadly classified into price-related measures such as tariffs and 
non-price measures or non-tariff barriers (NTBs).  
A tariff is a tax imposed on imports. Tariffs can be imposed on imports of both 
final and intermediate goods. Tariff on final and intermediate goods is considered 
while estimating the effective rate of protection provided to the domestic 
industries.  
In this unit, we will discuss the concept of 'effective rate of protection', which 
measures the extent of actual protection provided to domestic industry based on 
tariffs imposed on final and intermediate goods. Non-tariff barriers (NTBs) are 
applied to quantities and other attributes of traded goods and services.  
We discuss each of these instruments of trade protection in turn. 
The tools or instruments of trade protection that countries use to restrict imports 
can be classified into two categories: tariffs, price-related measures, and non-
tariff barriers (NTBs), which are non-price measures. 
Tariffs: Tariffs are taxes that are imposed on imported goods. They increase the 
price of imported goods, making them less competitive in the domestic market, 
which can provide some degree of protection to domestic producers. There are 
different types of tariffs, such as specific tariffs (based on the quantity or weight 
of the imported goods) and ad valorem tariffs (based on the value of the imported 
goods). Tariffs can be imposed at different stages of production or trade, such as 
at the border or on intermediate goods, which affects the overall level of 
protection provided to domestic producers. 
Non-tariff barriers (NTBs) : NTBs are measures that countries use to restrict 
imports without necessarily imposing a tax or a duty on imported goods. These 
can include measures such as quotas, which limit the quantity of a particular 
product that can be imported into a country, and voluntary export restraints 
(VERs), which are agreements between exporting and importing countries that 
limit the quantity of exports of a particular product. NTBs can also include 
technical barriers to trade (TBTs), which are regulations or standards that are 
used to restrict imports of certain products, and anti-dumping measures, which 
are imposed when a foreign producer is found to be selling goods in the domestic 
market at a lower price than in the exporting country. 


--- Page 21 ---
 
 
 
113 
Instruments of 
Protectionism In addition to these measures, subsidies are another tool that countries use t o 
protect domestic industries. Subsidies are payments or other types of support 
provided by governments to domestic producers. They can be used to make 
domestic products more competitive by reducing their production costs, which 
can help protect domestic industries from foreign competition. 
It is important to note that while these measures can protect domestic industries, 
they can also negatively affect consumers by increasing the cost of imported 
goods and other industries that rely on imports of intermediate goods. Therefore, 
countries need to carefully consider the trade-offs involved in using protectionist 
measures and weigh the benefits of protecting domestic industries against the 
costs to consumers and other industries. 
 
6.2  TARIFF BARRIERS 
As we have discussed in the previous unit, Tariff is a duty or tax imposed by the 
government of a country upon the traded commodity as it crosses the national 
boundaries. The levying of import tariffs brings relative changes in the prices of 
factors and products. Thus, the tariff brings an important change in the structure 
of international trade. Though many, various trade barriers advocate free trade, 
do exist in international trade. An import tariff is one of them. We have discussed 
various arguments in favour of trade protectionism in Unit 5. Majorly, countries 
impose trade barriers to protect their domestic industries or sectors from foreign 
competition, to conserve the foreign exchange reserves of the country and also to 
avoid dumping 
In this section, we will discuss different categories of tariffs along with the effect 
of a tariff on the economy. 
6.2.1 Classification of Tariffs 
Tariffs are of several types, and these can be classified into different groups or 
sub-groups as below: 
1) Classification based on 
Criterion for tariff imposition: 
Based on the criterion for tariff imposition  
These can be of the following types: 
a) Specific tariff, 
b) Ad Valorem tariff, 
c) Compound tariff and 
a)  Specific Tariff:  
A specific tariff is the fixed sum levied on each unit of the commodity 
imported or exported. Sometimes, weight or any other measurement of a 
commodity is charged instead of the physical unit. Such duties can be 
