--- Page 32 ---
 
 
 
124 
Free Trade versus 
Protectionism price from P w to P a. This leads to additional terms of trade loss e+f+g. Thus, 
export subsidy negatively affects the national welfare.  
Table 6.1 Welfare Effects of an Export Subsidy 
 Exporting Country 
Consumer Surplus − (a + b) 
Producer Surplus + (a + b + c) 
Govt. Revenue − (b + c + d + e+ f + g ) 
National Welfare − (b + d +e+ f + g ) 
 
6.4  NON-TARIFF BARRIERS 
Besides tariff barriers, various non-tariff barriers are also prevalent in various 
countries. Just like tariff barriers, non-tariff barriers also influence the global 
economy by limiting free trade. Various non –
tariff barriers include quantitative 
restrictions like import quotas, Voluntary export restraints, Exchange controls, 
Import deposit schemes, Health and safety standards, Customs valuation 
procedure, Local content requirements etc. This section will discuss these non-
tariff barriers and their impact on the economy. 
6.4.1 Import Quota 
Import quotas impose direct restrictions on the quantum of imports into a 
country.  
In practice, quotas are administered through a system of import licenses. Only 
license holders can import specified quantities of the imported goods into the 
domestic market. When imports are limited, domestic demand for the good 
exceeds domestic supply plus imports.  
Thus, you will see that with a quota the domestic price of an imported good will 
always be higher than its world market price. License holders buy the imported 
goods at world market prices and then sell at higher prices in the domestic 
market. Import quota raises the domestic prices by the same amount as a tariff 
that limits the imports to the same level except when it is a monopoly in the 
domestic market.  
In what follows we will examine the impact of an import quota under different 
market structures in the domestic economy. We first discuss the case of perfectly 
competitive markets and then that of monopoly.  
1) Import Quotas with Perfect Competition  
Figure 6.5 demonstrates the effect of an import quota when markets are perfectly 
competitive. D and S represent the demand and supply curves for the good before 


--- Page 33 ---
 
 
 
125 
Instruments of 
Protectionism quota imposition. Under free trade, the world price P w prevails, total domestic 
production is Q1, demand is Q 2, and Q1 Q2 amount is imported. Now suppose an 
import quota is imposed, which restricts imports to Q 1 Q3 (where, Q1Q3 < Q1Q2). 
Immediately with quota imposition, at the world price P w, domestic demand falls 
short of total domestic production plus imports. This excess domestic demand 
drives up prices in the domestic market, till the market clears.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source:  Figure 6.5 in Sikdar (2003) 
Figure 6.6: Effect of an import quota when markets are perfectly competitive 
The quota effectively shifts the domestic supply curve to S', by the amount of the 
quota. The economy moves to the new equilibrium E', where the price has risen 
from Pw to P', domestic production has increased from Q 1 to Q 4 while domestic 
demand has fallen from Q 2 to Q 5. At E', imports, restricted by the quota, are 
equal to the amount Q 4 Q5 (note that Q 3Q1 = Q 5Q4 = import quota). A tariff rate 
equal to P'- P w, is the tariff equivalent of the quota. It would have restricted 
imports to the same level as the quota and had the same effect on domestic 
prices. However, implementing the tariff equivalent of a quota may not always be 
feasible, as the rate may be too high to be acceptable. You should see that in the 
case of a tariff, a quota involves a loss in consumer surplus equal to the area (a + 
b + c + d). This is offset by a rise in producer surplus equal to the area a. But an 
important difference between tariffs and quotas arises from the fact that with a 
quota the government does not earn revenues as in the case of a tariff. The area c, 
therefore, does not accrue to the government, rather it represents the quota rent, 
which may be captured by the import-license holders, who buy at the world price 
Pw and sell at a higher price P', making a profit of (P' - P w) per unit of imports. If 
c accrues to the license holders and is counted as part of the social gain, then the 
social loss from the quota is equal to the area (b+ d), the same as in the case of a 
tariff.  
Often foreign exporters have the right to sell directly in the domestic market. In 
that case, the quota rent c would accrue to foreigners and it would be a social loss 
from the domestic country's point of view.  
P’ 
Pw 
O 
   Q4  Q3 
 
Q5 
 Q2 
 Q 
E 
E’ 
 S’ 
S 
a 
 b 
 c 
 d 
D 
Q1 
 
P 


--- Page 34 ---
 
 
 
126 
Free Trade versus 
Protectionism Another disturbing possibility, and one that is often observed in practice, is that 
the quota rent may not accrue to license holders. Rather it may be dissipated in 
rent-seeking activities, like paying bribes to acquire import licenses. In that case, 
area c would be a social loss and the total cost imposed by the quota would equal 
the area (b+c+d), which is more than in the case of an equivalent tariff.  
Governments in developing countries have the option to auction import licenses. 
A competitive bidding process would drive the price of licenses up to (P' - P w) 
per unit of imports and the government would earn revenue equal to the area c. If 
this process worked smoothly, the effects of a tariff and quota would be 
equivalent. However, sometimes, the auctions may not be competitive and 
collusion among bidders might subvert the entire process.  
2) Import Quotas with Monopoly  
When there is a domestic monopoly, an import quota leads to a greater loss in 
social welfare, as compared to perfect competition. We will see that in the 
presence of a monopoly, an import tariff should be preferred to a quota from the 
efficiency and social welfare point of view. 
When there is a tariff t, imports are freely available at a price (P w + t). So the 
monopolist cannot charge a higher price than this level, for if he did domestic 
consumers would go for imports and his sales would be reduced to zero. Thus, a 
tariff effectively imposes a price ceiling. However, with a quota, the monopolist 
can charge a price higher than the import price. In this case, he will not lose his 
entire market share, since imports cannot exceed the limit set by the quota. Thus 
a quota preserves the monopolist's price-setting power to a large extent. 
This argument is illustrated in Figure 6.6. Under free trade, D is the demand 
curve facing the monopolist and the domestic price of the good is the world 
market price, Pw. Suppose, an import quota is set, limiting imports to the amount 
Q1Q2. With the quota, the demand curve facing the monopolist shifts inwards by 
the amount of the quota, at all prices above P w, because imports have reduced the 
monopolist’s market by Q 1Q2. Post quota imposition, the relevant marginal 
revenue curve facing the monopolist is MR, corresponding to the new demand 
curve.  
In this situation, the monopolist will maximise profits by producing an output of 
Qm, at which marginal revenue equals marginal cost. This output will be sold at 
the price Pm, read off the demand curve. Now (P m - Pw) is the tariff equivalent of 
the quota or the quota rent earned by the import license holders. Note that with 
perfect competition in the domestic market, the MC curve would have been the 
supply curve, and the market price would have been P' and output, Q'. Clearly 
with a monopoly the outcome is more inefficient, compared to perfect 
competition. The monopoly output is lower (Q m < Q') and the price is higher  
(Pm > P'), leading to greater welfare losses. From this analysis it should be clear 
to you why tariffs are preferred to quotas, especially when the domestic producer 


--- Page 35 ---
 
 
 
127 
Instruments of 
Protectionism wields monopoly power. GATT negotiations have tried to phase out quantitative 
restrictions and replace quotas with tariffs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source:  Figure 6.5 in Sikdar (2003) 
Figure 6.5: Effect of an import quota when the market is a monopoly 
6.4.2 Voluntary Export Restraint 
A variant of the import quota is the voluntary export restraint (VER), also known 
as a voluntary restraint agreement (VRA). A VER is a quota on trade imposed 
from the exporting country's side instead of the importers. This is a self-imposed 
restriction on the quantity of a good permitted to export to another country.  
VERs are export quotas negotiated by an importing country with its trading 
partners. Under this, importing countries request other countries to voluntarily 
lower their exports to protect domestic businesses. Under the negotiation, 
exporting country voluntarily agrees to restrict the quantity of exports. VERs had 
been a popular way for importing countries to protect their domestic industries 
without going into a trade war with exporting countries.  
Historically, it was used largely by developed countries on textiles, footwear, 
steel, automobiles, etc to impose their own restrictions rather than facing tariffs 
and quotas. It was one of the popular measures of protectionism during the 
1980s. But the WTO members agreed to not use any new VERs in 1994. As per 
many economists, Voluntary Export Restraints are ineffective over a longer 
period. For instance, The U.S. automobile companies were facing more 
competition from efficient Japanese automobiles so Japan imposed Voluntary 
Export Restraints (VERs) on the exports of cars manufactured in Japan to the 
U.S. but this non-tariff measure proved to be ineffective. 
MR 
 D 
O 
Pm 
P’ 
Pw 
MC 
Q 
Q’ 
Qm 
Q1 
 Q2 


--- Page 36 ---
 
 
 
128 
Free Trade versus 
Protectionism In Uruguay's negotiation round, World Trade Organization (WTO) does not 
prevent governments from imposing VERs on exporters through negotiation. 
However, the governments of the importing and exporting countries are 
sometimes able to convince exports to put VERs on the quantity of the exports. A 
VER is always more costly to the importing country than a tariff that limits the 
imports by the same amount.  
Table 6.2 Summary of Impact of Tariff and quantitative restrictions on the 
Economy 
 Tariff Export 
subsidy 
Import Quota Voluntary 
export 
restraint 
Producer 
Surplus 
Increases Increases Increases Increases 
Consumer 
surplus 
Falls Falls Falls Falls 
Government 
revenue 
Increases Falls 
(government 
spending 
rises) 
No change 
(rent to 
license 
holders) 
No change 
(rent to 
foreigners) 
Overall 
national 
welfare 
Ambiguous 
(falls for a 
small 
country) 
Falls Ambiguous 
(falls for a 
small 
country) 
Falls 
Source: Krugman, P. R., & Obstfeld, M. (1997). International economics: 
Theory and policy. Addison Wesley. 
6.4.3 Other Non-Tariff Barriers 
The following are some of the other important NTBs commonly used by 
countries following protectionist policies:  
1) Exchange controls:  
Exchange controls are restrictions imposed by countries' Central Banks that 
directly limit domestic residents' ability to acquire foreign currency in 
exchange for domestic currency. For instance, one method of imposing 
exchange controls involved acquiring the Central Bank's permission to hold 
foreign currency bank accounts. 
2) Import deposit schemes:  
These are rules imposed by countries' Central Banks, which tend to restrict 
imports by making them more expensive. For instance, under the rules 
importers are required to deposit a certain amount (usually in proportion to 
the value of the imported good) with the Central Bank, which effectively 
raises the cost of importing.  


--- Page 37 ---
 
 
 
129 
Instruments of 
Protectionism 3) Health and safety standards:  
Often importing countries insist that imported goods meet certain minimum 
health, safety and environmental standards. Meeting the standards would 
raise costs for the exporting country. Presumably, the underlying motive for 
standard imposition is to safeguard the health and general welfare of domestic 
residents of the importing nation. However, in practice, these standards are 
often used by developed nations to restrict imports originating from low wage 
developing countries. For instance, faced with cheap manufacturing imports 
from low-wage countries like Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand, developed 
countries now insist that these counties comply with certain minimum labour 
and environmental standards, which would raise their production costs.  
4) Customs valuation procedure: 
Under this procedure, the importing country would artificially enhance the 
value of the imported goods under some pretext, which would raise its duty 
under a system of ad valorem tariffs. For instance, Sikdar (2003, p.141) cites 
the example of the US valuing certain chemical imports at the 'American 
selling price' (rather than at the 'invoice' price or the 'world market' price) in 
the post-war period. However, this practice was discontinued since the Tokyo 
Round of negotiations.  
5) Local content 
requirements:  
This is a practice followed especially in developing countries, which requires 
that some stipulated portion of a final good be produced domestically. Or it 
may be stated that a certain specified fraction of the final goods price must 
represent domestic value added. The underlying logic is to promote the local 
production of certain intermediate goods. From the importing firm’s 
viewpoint, there is no restriction on imports. For they can import more, if 
they also buy more from local firms. From the domestic intermediate 
industries' point of view, a local content requirement provides trade 
protection in the same way as an import quota.
  
Check Your Progress 3 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  What are the effects of an import quota, when there is perfect competition in 
the domestic market?? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 


--- Page 38 ---
 
 
 
130 
Free Trade versus 
Protectionism 2) What are the effects of an import quota, when there is a monopoly in the 
domestic market? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) List various non-tariff barriers that countries use to restrict trade flows. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
4) What do you mean by Voluntary Export restraints? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
6.5  LET US SUM UP 
After understanding the theories of protectionism in the previous unit, we 
discussed various instruments countries use to protect their domestic industries 
from free trade and international competition. We discussed tariffs and various 
non-tariff barriers to trade in this unit.  
In this unit, we discussed various categories of a tariff like import tariffs, export 
tariffs, Specific tariffs, Ad Valorem tariffs, Compound tariffs, revenue tariffs, 
protective tariffs, Single-Column tariffs, Double-Column tariffs and Triple-
Column tariffs. We also discussed the effective rate of protection, which 
measures the extent of protection granted to the domestic industry by the given 
structure of nominal tariff rates. Tariffs on raw materials and intermediates would 
raise the cost of production for domestic industry and will affect the effective rate 
of protection vis-à-vis nominate rate of tariff.  
We also discussed the economic impact of Import tariffs in partial equilibrium 
analysis on various economic agents like consumers, producers and the 
government. We found out that while tariff increases producer surplus and 
government revenue, it hurts consumer surplus. We also examined the impact of 
the tariff on the Volume of trade and Terms of trade (TOT) in general 
equilibrium analysis in the case of a small country and a large country. Overall 
the national welfare falls for the small country.  
We also discussed Export subsidies as government policies that are implemented 
to encourage the export of goods by incentivizing local producers through easy 
and cheaper loans, direct payments, tax benefits etc. We analysed its impact on 
the economy and compared it with the effect of the tariff on the economy. We 
analysed that while export subsidy is beneficial for the producer, it hurts 


--- Page 39 ---
 
 
 
131 
Instruments of 
Protectionism Consumer surplus and government revenue. Overall, export subsidies negatively 
affect the overall national welfare. 
We also discussed quantitative restrictions like import quota and Voluntary 
export restraints and their impact on the economy. We identified that import 
quota and VER increase producer surplus and reduce consumer surplus. We also 
discussed about other non-tariff barriers like exchange controls, import deposit 
schemes, health and safety standards, customs valuation procedure and local 
content requirements 
We also identified that tariffs lead to more efficient outcomes compared to non-
tariff barriers like quotas, as in addition to restricting the flows of imported 
goods; tariffs also impose a price discipline on domestic firms. Further, while the 
government directly benefits from tariff revenues, the quota rent may be 
completely dissipated in wasteful rent-seeking activities, leading to a social loss. 
6.6  KEY WORDS 
Consumer Surplus The gain to consumers when the price they 
are willing to pay for a given quantity of a 
good exceeds the amount they have to pay 
for that quantity. 
Effective Rate of protection (ERP) It measures the extent of protection granted 
to the domestic industry by the given 
structure of nominal tariff rates. 
Free Trade When countries engage in international 
trade without imposing any policy 
restrictions on the free flow of goods and 
services across international boundaries. 
Non-tariff barriers A non-tariff barrier is any measure other 
than a customs tariff, that acts as a barrier to 
international trade. 
Perfect Competition Perfect Competition is a market condition 
characterised by perfect information among 
buyers and sellers. It consists of a large 
number of firms that are price takers and 
who sell a homogeneous product to a large 
number of buyers.  
Producers Surplus The gain to producers arises from the 
difference between the minimum price at 
which they are willing to supply a given 
quantity of a good and the price they 
receive by selling that quantity in the 
market. 


--- Page 40 ---
 
 
 
132 
Free Trade versus 
Protectionism Quota A quantitative restriction on the quantum of 
imports is permissible that is often 
administered via the distribution of import 
licenses. 
Tariff A tax imposed on imported goods raises the 
price of such goods in the domestic market. 
Terms of Trade The ratio of the price received for a 
country's exports to the price paid for its 
imports. 
Voluntary export restraint It is a self-imposed trade restriction at the 
request of the importing country whereby 
an exporting country limits the number of 
goods of a particular nature that it can 
export to a specific country or 
region. 
6.7  SOME USEFUL REFERENCES 
Acharyya, Rajat (2014). International Economics: An introduction to theory and 
policy. Oxford University Press. Chapters 9 and 10.  
Cherunilam, Francis (1997). International Economics.  Tata McGraw-Hill 
Publishing Company Ltd. Chapter 10.  
Krugrnan, P. and M. Obstfeld (2000). International Economics: Theory and 
Policy, Addison Wesley Longman: Singapore. Chapters 8, 9 and 10. 
Salvatore, D. (2004). International Economics,  Eighth Edition, John Wiley & 
Sons: Singapore. Chapter 8.  
Sikdar, S. (2003). Contemporary Issues in Globalisation: An Introduction to 
Theory and Policy in India, Oxford University Press: New Delhi. Chapter 6. 
6.8  ANSWERS/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES  
Check your progress 1 
1) Case I: Equal, Case II: Higher. Case III: Lower 
2) The Single-Column Tariff also known as the uni-linear tariff system 
provides uniform tariff rates to all the commodities irrespective of the 
country of origin while in the Double-Column tariff system, different tariff 
rates are charged for different countries. 
3) Refer to section 6.2.1 


--- Page 41 ---
 
 
 
133 
Instruments of 
Protectionism Check your progress 2 
1) Refer to section 6.2.3 
2) Refer to section 6.2.4 
3) Refer to section 6.2.4 
Check your progress 3 
1) Refer to section 6.4.1 
2) Refer to section 6.4.1 
3) Refer to section 6.4.3 
4) Refer to section 6.4.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
