--- Page 1 ---
 
 
 
93 
Policies of 
Protectionism  
 
 
 
 
BLOCK 3 
 
 
FREE TRADE  
VERSUS  
PROTECTIONISM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Unit 5 Policies of Protectionism   
Unit 6 Instruments of Protectionism 


--- Page 2 ---
 
 
 
94 
Free Trade versus 
Protectionism BLOCK INTRODUCTION 
This block presents the comparative analysis of free trade and protectionism. It discussed the 
various policies and instruments of protectionism and their implications on World economy. 
This block comprises of two units 
Unit 5 Policies of Protectionism  talks about free trade and protected trade. It elaborates the 
benefits and costs associated with free trade and protected trade. The unit also presents the 
economic and non-economic arguments for protectionism. In order to present the complete 
picture, it also delves into arguments against protectionism. The Unit also contextualizes the 
theme by discussing the latest Developments in India‟s Protectionism Policy and their 
implications on the Indian economy. 
Unit 6 Instruments of Protectionism extends the theme discussed in previous unit by 
explaining various tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade. It delves into economic impact of 
tariff in partial and general equilibrium analysis. Using diagram, it also describes export 
subsidy and the impact it has on the economy. The unit also discuss quantitative restrictions 
like import quota and Voluntary export restraints and their impact on the economy along with 
other non-tariff barriers like exchange controls, import deposit schemes, health and safety 
standards, customs valuation procedure and local content requirements. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  


--- Page 3 ---
 
 
 
95 
Policies of 
Protectionism UNIT 5  POLICIES OF PROTECTIONISM  
Structure 
5.0  Objectives 
5.1  Introduction 
5.2  Free Trade vs Protectionism 
5.2.1 Concept of Free Trade 
  5.2.1.1 Advantages and Disadvantages of Free Trade.  
5.2.2 Concept of Protected Trade  
 5.2.2.1 Benefits and Costs of Protected Trade 
5.3  Protectionism Policies 
5.4  Economic and Non-Economic Arguments for Protectionism  
5.4.1 Economic Arguments 
5.4.2 Non-Economic Arguments   
5.5  Arguments Against Protectionism 
5.6  Let us sum up 
5.7  Key Words 
5.8  Some Useful References 
5.9  Answers/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
5.0  OBJECTIVES 
After studying this Unit, you should be able to:  
 distinguish the distinction between free trade and protected trade;  
 identify the benefits and costs associated with free trade and protected trade; 
 analyse the protectionism policies in international trade; 
 discuss the impact of protectionism policies on the economy; and  
 analyse the protectionism policy of India. 
                                                 
 Contributed by  Dr. Phool Chand, Associate Professor of Economics, PGDAV College, Delhi University.  


--- Page 4 ---
 
 
 
96 
Free Trade versus 
Protectionism 5.1   INTRODUCTION 
You have learnt in earlier units about all the classical, neo-classical and modern 
trade theories. You have also seen that free trade is better than autarky. Although 
free trade is better than autarky, is free trade better than protected trade, i.e., trade 
protected by tariffs, import quotas or subsidies? The countries that impose 
restrictions on trade tend to follow protectionism trade policy. Tariffs and non-
tariff measures are used to restrict the trade. A tariff is a price-based policy to 
restrict trade and others are non-price-based policy (non-tariff barriers). In this 
unit, you will learn the concepts of free trade and protected trade, the 
protectionism policies and the arguments for and against protectionism. 
Emphasis will be laid on the protectionism policy of India.  
5.2  FREE TRADE VS PROTECTIONISM 
International trade between countries can be either protected trade or free trade. 
Protectionism is all about restrictions on international trade to support domestic 
industries. Usually, protectionist policies are implemented to benefit the domestic 
industry players. Common examples of protectionism include tariffs, quotas, and 
subsidies. These protectionism tools are used to make foreign goods expensive 
and promote domestic industries. Free trade is a trade policy where government 
interventions and restrictions do not impede trade. It is the opposite of trade 
protectionism. As per many economists, gains from free trade extend beyond the 
production distortions and elimination of consumption. 
5.2.1 Concept of Free Trade 
Free trade is a policy where trade barriers in respect of all items among member 
countries are completely eliminated while, at the same time, each member 
country follows its own policy in regard to trade with non-member countries. In 
such a natural environment of international commerce, the nations can focus on 
their core competitive advantage thereby increasing output and growth of the 
economy. According to classical economists like Adam Smith (1776) and David 
Ricardo (1816) and modern economists, the most fundamental doctrine is welfare 
enhanced with free trade.  In the words of Adam Smith, free trade is a 
commercial policy in which there is no distinction between domestic and foreign 
goods. With such a policy, no restrictions to trade exist between the countries. 
While the basic objective of the free trade is improving the welfare of people 
within the region through creating a larger production base and increased market 
size for producers, and wider choice to both producers and consumers. 
5.2.1.1 Advantages a
nd Disadvantages of Free Trade  
The reasons that have prompted several countries to create free trade area 
includes: safeguards against the advent of monopolies, increased world 
production and consumption, helps in building better linkages with other 
countries, higher earnings of the factors of production, and benefits for 
consumers as well as producers.  


--- Page 5 ---
 
 
 
97 
Policies of 
Protectionism The advocates of free trade put forward the following advantages of free trade: 
1) Higher Efficiency and Optimum Utilisation of Resources 
Free trade stimulates the managerial efficiency of domestic producers, 
leading to the optimum utilization of the factors of production. Under free 
trade, each country imports those products in which the country has a 
comparative disadvantage and produces those products in which it has a 
specialization. So, the resources get utilized in the best possible manner. 
2) Reduced Tariff measures leads to Trade Creation 
Trade creation happens when consumption shifts from high-cost to low-cost 
producers. Under free trade, tariffs, and non-tariff barriers are slashed leading 
to the creation of trade.  
3) International Specialization 
Free trade leads to international specialization as with the expansion of trade 
the different countries produce those goods in which they have a comparative 
advantage. International trade enables countries to reap the benefits of 
specialization like the countries can obtain various products. Otherwise, in a 
world of no trade, the countries would have a scarcity of some products. 
Nepal would have no oil, Britain no tea, and Iceland no coal.  
4) Build better Relations with other Countries  
Countries under free trade share common economic interests and work 
together towards increasing prosperity and their people's standard of living, 
which helps build better relations with member countries. As a result of free 
trade, trade creation, and trade diversification happen which helps in forming 
better linkages with member countries as well as non-member countries.   
5) Removes Evil effects of Protection 
The evil effects of protectionism such as the growth of monopolies and high 
prices, etc.,
 can be removed with the help of Free trade.  
6) Imported goods at a lower rate    
From the consumers‟ side, it is one of the important arguments in favor of 
free trade. Under Free trade imported goods can be procured at lower prices. 
Consumer benefits from free trade through cheap rates, and producers benefit 
from increased earnings due to specialization and optimum utilization of 
resources. 
7) Enhanced Competition  
Free trade leads to enhanced competition in the market that prevents the 
growth of monopolies and promotes fair prices in the market. So, it compels 
the local producers to enhance their efficiency or quit the market. 
 


--- Page 6 ---
 
 
 
98 
Free Trade versus 
Protectionism 8) Economic Growth  
With the expansion of trade, the countries reap the benefits of a competitive 
market, increased efficiency, and growth of production. All these benefits of 
free trade add to the better standard of living, and rising income increases 
nations' economic growth.  
Although free trade has several benefits, it is abandoned by the countries 
worldwide. The significant disadvantages of free trade 
are as follows:  
1) The impact of free trade on third countries' export will result in trade 
diversion.  This will mean loss of market to third countries.   
2) Some goods which are injurious and harmful are not allowed to import freely 
thereby, trade barriers become inevitable in such a scenario. 
3) It becomes difficult for established domestic or newly developed industries to 
compete with efficient foreign industries. So, they need assistance from the 
government to survive in the competitive environment.  
4) Companies often cut the corners and ignore environmentally friendly 
practices. In order to produce at a lower cost and become more efficient, the 
companies violate environmental legislation which raises pollution-related 
concerns.  
5.2.2 Concept of Protected Trade  
After understanding the concept of free trade and the advantages and 
disadvantages from free trade. The question now arises, what have been the 
reasons for adopting restricted trade? Let us analyse the concept of protectionism. 
Generally, Protectionism refers to left-wing politics which support economic 
populism. On the contrary, right-wing politics support free trade. The countries 
adopt protectionist policies to protect the employment of domestic industries, 
promote the growth of MSMEs and serve as a security shield to the nation.      
Protectionism is the economic policy that is used to protect domestic industries 
from foreign competition. Generally, it is a defensive measure that limits the 
competition from well-established foreign industries. The policy of protectionism 
works in the short run but it can be proved very destructive in the long run. 
Protectionism includes government trade policies that limit free trade between 
particular countries and promote domestic industries. With the help of tariffs, 
import quotas, and subsidies to local producers, the government protects local 
industries from foreign competition. 
Examples of Protectionism 
1) EU Agricultural Protectionism 
To increase the farmer‟s income and protect the local farmers, the EU still 
uses tariff rates on agricultural products such as animal & dairy products, 


--- Page 7 ---
 
 
 
99 
Policies of 
Protectionism fruits & vegetables, coffee, tea, cereals and Preps, oilseeds, fats & oils, sugars 
and confectionery, Beverages & tobacco, and other agro products. 
2) Banana Wars 
Tariffs were imposed on Banana imports from Latin America for a long time 
however, tariffs were reduced to some extent in the 2012 agreement. 
3) Tariffs of the Trump Administration 
President Donald Trump imposed higher tariffs on refrigerators, washing 
machines, and clothes from China. While China also retaliated and imposed 
tariffs on agricultural exports of the US.  
4) Argentina Tariffs on Food 
Under the Mercosur Common External Tariff, the import duties on 
agricultural products have increased. 
5) Anti-Dumping Tariffs 
Anti-Dumping tariffs are justified by the WTO because cheap imports due to 
dumping make the survival of domestic firms difficult. Therefore, the tariffs 
may be justified to prevent the adverse effects of dumping.  
6) Illegal Subsidies 
To support the domestic export industry, another protectionism measure 
called subsidies is used so that domestic producers can compete in the global 
market. For example, the US filed a complaint in 2012 that China subsidies 
excessively to support its car industry. And like European airlines have been 
given a subsidy by the European government to prevent their airlines from 
busting.  
7) Growth of Red Tape 
Red tape is a popular method among countries nowadays to strangle traders 
instead of breaking WTO rules by putting tariffs. To discourage imports, 
some countries prefer imposing red tape rather than tariffs which causes a 
hike in the trading cost of administration. For instance, for discouraging the 
exports of developing countries, the highly stringent standards set by 
developed countries. 
8) Devaluation as Protectionism 
Devaluation of currency is a kind of unfair trade practice adopted by 
developing countries to make their exports more competitive against foreign 
competition. For instance, to make Chinese exports highly competitive 
against the EU and the US producers, China has often resorted to currency 
devaluation. 


--- Page 8 ---
 
 
 
100 
Free Trade versus 
Protectionism 5.2.2.1 Benefits and Costs of Protected Trade 
Benefits of Protected Trade 
Particular governments adopt protectionist policies due to following reasons:  
1) Protected trade safeguards local jobs and infant industry from foreign 
competition. 
2) It protects consumers from unsafe foreign products that could be harmful and 
injurious to health and thus discourage unethical practices. 
3) Protectionism policies prevent the adverse effects of dumping practices and 
preserve culture.  
4) Protected trade helps lower import bills and improves the country‟s trade 
balance.   
5) Foreign exchange kitty shall be sufficient to meet the necessary obligations . 
Sometimes, to preserve the foreign exchange resources, protectionism helps 
in the rational allocation of forex for selected imports. 
6) Trade barriers tend to boost the economy's GDP due to growth in domestic 
production.  
Costs of Protected Trade  
After understanding the benefits of protected trade, let us now discuss the cost of 
protected trade 
1) The natural resources do not get utilised properly which encourages 
inefficient industries.  
2) By restricting foreign competition, a monopoly market is created, which 
reduces the welfare of society and increases the loss to consumers.  
3) It leads to inequality in the distribution of national income,  
4) The trade barriers restrict the total volume of foreign trade  
5) Protectionism policies adversely affect international relations and global 
diplomacy.  
Check
 Your Progress 1 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  What is free trade policy? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 


--- Page 9 ---
 
 
 
101 
Policies of 
Protectionism 2) What do you mean by protected trade? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Distinguish between free trade and protected trade. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
4. State whether the following statements are True or False: 
a) The impact of free trade on third countries export will result in trade 
diversion.   
b) Free trade safeguards against the advent of monopolies in the market.  
c) Protected trade improves the trade balance of the country in long run. 
d) Protectionism refers to left-wing politics which support economic 
populism. 
5.3 PROTECTIONIST POLICI ES 
Protectionist Policies are government controls or measures such as tariffs, quotas, 
and subsidies to restrict international trade so that local industries can be shielded 
or protected from foreign competition. The following policies have been adopted 
across the world to protect domestic producers:  
Tariffs: This is the most popular policy measure by which governments 
worldwide have been interfering with the movement of goods between countries. 
Tariffs are taxes or duties levied on imported goods. Tariffs make imported 
goods more expensive for consumers and businesses. To shield local producers 
from the competitive effect of globalization, tariffs are imposed by a particular 
government. The tariff-imposing countries benefit from the tariffs as they will be 
an extra source of income for importing countries. For example, to raise world oil 
prices, the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) collects tax 
on oil exports. It works as an extra income source for OPEC, reducing the oil 
supply in the global market.  
Under the “America First” policy of the Trump administration, Tariffs have been 
imposed on washing machines, solar panels, aluminium, and new tariffs levied 
on French and Chinese goods like champagne, cheese, and iPhone. The demand 
for goods from domestic industries will increase as they would be relatively 
cheaper than imported goods because of tariffs. Tariffs have a special role in 
trade policy and negotiations.    


--- Page 10 ---
 
 
 
102 
Free Trade versus 
Protectionism Tariff is not the only policy measure to limit trade and shield the domestic 
import-competing industry. The numerous non-tariff barriers are imposed by 
government to restrict against imports or exports. Now let us briefly discuss 
major kinds of non-tariff barriers and their implications on international trade.  
Import Quotas – It is a non-tariff barrier. Import quotas refers to imposing limit 
on the quantity of a product imported without prior consultation or negotiation 
with exporting countries. It is a unilateral quota that limits the number of 
imported goods during a specific period. In international trade, import quotas 
regulate and restrict trade volume between countries. The main objective of 
Import quotas is to lower imports, raise domestic production and reduce the BOP 
deficit.  For example, China has an import quota on exports of rice from 
Cambodia (3,00,000 tonnes per year). Recently, on June 2021, Indian 
Government increased the import quota on the urad and tur from Myanmar until 
March 2026 (for five fiscal years) to raise the domestic production of pulses. 
Sometimes, import quota is also enacted by the government over quality and 
safety concerns and to maintain the limited foreign exchange reserve. However, it 
may displease foreign countries as a result of which they would retaliate with 
high tariffs on exports. Another disadvantage of levying import quotas is that it 
does not generate revenue for the imposing government instead foreign producers 
benefit from it. 
For example, Suppose, a developing country wants to boost the domestic 
manufacturing of electrical goods so that consumers can purchase them at a 
lower price. For now, that country imports the majority of electrical goods. If the 
Government decides to impose a quota on imported electrical goods, then the 
availability of such goods will get limited and their cost will increase. As a result, 
domestic manufacturers started expanding into the production of electrical goods. 
Subsidies – It refers to direct or indirect financial assistance from governments to 
companies for making them competitive. The government provides subsidies to 
domestic producers or exporters to stimulate the expansion of such industries. 
Cash disbursements, preferential exchange rates, or some other favourable 
treatments are the examples of subsidies.  The critics of subsidies argue that they 
reduce competition, create unfair market conditions that favour certain industries, 
and distort the free market. The raging war at WTO nowadays between 
developed and developing countries is about the high subsidies provided by the 
latter to agriculture and some other industries such as steel. Subsidies help the 
local companies to be cost competitive not only with imported products but also 
with domestic products in overseas market. The government provides various 
types of export assistance to exporters to make the export products more 
competitive in the overseas market. For example, the USA provides huge 
subsidies to the domestic agriculture sector, oil and energy producers, etc.,  that 
hurts the exporters of developing world. The Agreement on Subsidies and 
Countervailing Measures (Subsidies Agreement) of the WTO provides rules for 
the use of government subsidies and for the application of remedies to address 
subsidized trade that has harmful commercial effects.  


--- Page 11 ---
 
 
 
103 
Policies of 
Protectionism Technical Trade Barriers (TBT) – It is a type of non-tariff trade barrier capable 
of distorting international trade. Technical regulations, standards, and conformity 
procedures are discriminatory and barriers to trade for health, safety, and product 
labelling. It makes the procedure of export of goods more complex. Often, TBTs 
are superior to tariffs and create more obstacles for exporters. Testing and 
Certification are the technical barriers to trade that make the export procedure 
more difficult. For instance, a product certified by Canada Standard Association 
(CSA) may not be valid in other countries. So, the product needs to be recertified 
which is a time-consuming and expensive process. The WTOs agreement of 
TBTs aims to eliminate these barriers and promote free trade.    
Voluntary Export Restraints (VERs)  –
 When the importing country imposes a 
certain limitation on the maximum volume of exports for the exporting country, it 
is called Voluntary Export Restraints (VERs). Since the exporters get to decide 
the volume of exports to the importing country, it is voluntary. 
Besides the non-tariff barriers, there are other restrictions, such as local content 
and foreign investment performance requirement, anti-dumping regulations, 
government procurement, customs classification and valuation, which we will 
discuss in detail under the instruments of protectionism in next chapter. 
Check Your Progress 2 
Note: 
i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  What do you mean by protectionist policies? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) What are tariffs? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Enumerate three protectionism policies. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
