--- Page 85 ---
289 
Behavioural Finance UNIT 29   BEHAVIOURAL FINANCE 
Structure 
29.0 Objectives  
29.1 Introduction 
29.2 Concept of Behavioural Finance 
29.3 Difference between Traditional Finance and Behavioural Finance 
29.4 Growth and Origin of Behavioural Finance 
29.5 Efficient Markets Hypothesis and Anomalies 
29.5.1  Efficient Market Hypothesis and Its Critique 
29.5.2  Market Anomalies  
29.5.3  Market Puzzles and Behavioural Explanation 
29.6 Irrational Investor: Cognitive, Social and Emotional Influences on the 
Investor 
29.6.1  Heuristics 
29.6.2  Sources of Irrational Investor Behaviour 
 29.6.2.1  Cognitive Influences on Investor Behaviour 
 29.6.2.2  Social Influences on Investor Behaviour 
 29.6.2.3  Emotional Influences on Investor Behaviour 
29.7 Let Us Sum Up 
29.8 Key Words 
29.9 Some Useful Books 
29.10 Answers / Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
29.11 Terminal Questions 
29.0  OBJECTIVES 
After studying this unit, you will be able to: 
 explain the concept of behavioural finance;
 describe the departure from traditional finance concepts to behavioural
finance;
 differentiate between traditional finance and behavioural finance;
 explain the Efficient Market Hypothesis;
 give a behavioural explanation to important market puzzles;
 explain the causes of irrational investor behaviour; and
 describe the heuristics and biases that explain it.


--- Page 86 ---
290 
Financial Stability 29.1  INTRODUCTION 
Traditionally, finance has been based around the concept of “efficient 
markets” which states that the price of an asset or security is ‘right’, i.e., the 
price reflects its fundamental value and all the available information. For a 
long time, financial theory was governed by the idea that investors act 
rationally as they have all the available information and they aim to 
maximize profits. The theory believes that even if there is any ‘noise’ by 
irrational investors in the market, it is balanced by rational investors. 
Traditional finance has been surrounded by three unbounded traits 
(rationality, self-control and self-interest) which form a base for ‘homo 
economicus’.  
However, over time, it was felt that the traditional theory was not able to 
explain various market anomalies like market volatility and unpredictability 
in the market, market crashes, irrational investor behaviour, stock market 
bubbles etc. Traditional finance also was not able to address questions like 
'why does an investor trade, how does an investor trade, what are the factors 
that help an investor decide his portfolio etc. 
These market anomalies and investor behaviour were explained by an 
alternative approach termed ‘Behavioural Finance’ which focuses on 
cognitive, sociological and psychological influences on the decision-making 
of investors and financial markets. It focuses on other important aspects of 
the decision-making process, i.e., how people invest, what they value and 
how they adjust for risk by embracing findings from psychology and 
sociology. Behavioural finance highlights that the investors are not always 
rational and the prices are not always efficient. 
Over the last few decades, behavioural finance has become an extremely 
popular field of study as an application in business and finance. It centres 
around the fact that investors’ decisions are influenced by their own biases. 
Thus, investors behave quite differently from ‘homo economicus’ and their 
financial choices are guided by their social and psychological needs. It also 
highlights that investors as humans have limits to self-control and often apply 
heuristics to make complex decisions.  
We have discussed traditional finance and the ‘Efficient Market Hypothesis’ 
(EMH) in previous units. In the present unit, we will discuss what is beyond 
traditional finance and EMH. In this unit, we will discuss behavioural 
finance, the factors that led to the growth of this parallel field and how it 
attempts to explain investors’ behaviour and financial markets. 
29.2  CONCEPT OF BEHAVIOURAL FINANCE 
As discussed in the previous section, behavioural finance focuses on 
understanding the thought process of investors and how it impacts their 
decisions. It attempts to explain the degree of various influences on a 


--- Page 87 ---
291 
Behavioural Finance person’s decision-making. It further explains various market anomalies and 
heuristics and biases that cause it. 
Behavioural finance became popular after 2002 when Daniel Kahneman was 
awarded the Nobel Prize for his work on psychological research into 
economic science, especially concerning human judgment and decision-
making under uncertainty. Behavioural finance is studied in two aspects: 
individual investors, and the whole market. Accordingly, behavioural finance 
is classified into two aspects: (i) microbehavioural finance, and (ii) 
macrobehavioural finance. 
Microbehavioural finance deals with the cognitive, psychological and 
sociological influences on the individual investors. It delves into behavioural 
biases that distinguish them from rational economic beings. It also studies 
heuristics as rules of thumb that lead to suboptimal decision-making.  
Macro-behavioural finance, on the other hand, examines market anomalies 
that make the market inefficient. It focuses on the reasons behind stock 
bubbles, market volatility and limited arbitrage. This unit deals with both 
aspects of behavioural finance. 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) What is meant by behavioural finance?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
2) What are the assumptions of traditional finance theory?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
3) Which one of the following is not a trait of ‘homo-economicus’?
a) Rationality
b) Self-control
c) Cognitive bias
d) Self-interest
4) Microbehavioural finance deals with:
a) Irrational investor Behaviour
b) Stock market volatility
c) Bubbles
d) Limited arbitrage


--- Page 88 ---
292 
Financial Stability 29.3 DIFFERENCE BETWEEN TRADITIONAL 
FINANCE AND BEHAVIOURAL FINANCE 
Traditional finance centres around the concept of investor and market 
rationality. It suggests that given the available information, investors make 
financial decisions and in the course of decision-making, are not affected by 
emotions. Traditional finance does not consider the role of heuristics and 
accordingly does not contemplate investors being affected by any bias. On 
the other hand, behavioural finance examines the role of psychology and 
sociology in financial decision-making. It considers the influence that mood, 
fear, overconfidence, past experiences etc. have on investors when they 
decide to devote funds to any asset.  
More than contrasting, behavioural finance provides an alternative approach 
to traditional finance to have a better understanding of the market and 
investors. Behavioural finance draws from real life that investors are 
sometimes irrational, and biased and are influenced by various social and 
psychological factors. For example, it is often observed that while buying 
stocks, many times investors follow other investors because they think that 
everyone else knows more and makes better decisions. This reflects a herding 
mentality and can lead to sub-optimal decisions by an investor. 
The main points of contrast between traditional and behavioural finance are: 
 Traditional finance centres around the idea of investor rationality and an
unbiased approach to processing information for decision-making.
While behavioural finance considers the influence of various biases in
investment decision-making, it recognizes that human emotions and
other psychological influences may make an investor irrational.
Overconfidence, familiarity bias, herding mentality, etc. deter the
decision-making capacity of an investor.
 Traditional finance assumes the availability of complete information to
everyone in the market. It further assumes that investors examine all the
information rationally before making a decision. Thus, investors always
make the right decision. Behavioural finance, on the other hand, centres
around the idea of bounded rationality, i.e., investors do not process all
the information and they try to satisfice instead of maximise. Even if the
information available is accurate, investors will still make errors in
judgment.
 Traditional finance centres around the ‘efficient markets hypothesis’, i.e.,
markets are efficient and the price of a stock always reflects its
fundamental value. It is based on the availability of complete knowledge
and investor rationality. However, behavioural finance disagrees with the
fact that markets are efficient and discusses various anomalies that lead
to market volatility and cannot be explained through EMH.


--- Page 89 ---
293 
Behavioural Finance  Investors, according to traditional finance have perfect self-control and
they do not let any other aspect of their past or personality influence their
decision-making. Behavioural finance considers self-control problems in
investors and examines how it affects decision making in turn affecting
the whole market.
 Classical finance theory asserts that any noise is balanced out by rational
traders but according to behavioural finance, there is a limit to arbitrage
and prices are not always right and may stay in a non-equilibrium state
for certain periods.
29.4  GROWTH AND ORIGIN OF BEHAVIOURAL 
FINANCE 
The cognitive and psychological underpinnings to explain stock market 
Behaviour can be traced back to the 60s and 70s also but it was mainly in the 
1980s when Behavioural finance evolved with an attempt to explain stock 
market bubbles and other market anomalies. Since then, foundational ideas of 
Behavioural Economics have been used to explain the reason behind these 
anomalies. The ideas of Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky have played a 
major role in explaining the contradictions in the traditional theory of 
finance.  
Over time, behavioural finance has developed through two phases: (i) 
through examples of market anomalies and deviation from standard finance 
assumptions; and (ii) through explanation of these anomalies. The decade of 
the 1980s saw various important concepts like ‘disposition effect’ and ‘equity 
premium puzzle’ being developed by various economists. In 1981, Robert 
James Shiller discussed market anomalies and pointed out how rational 
factors alone cannot explain stock market volatility. De Bondt and Richard 
Thaler’s paper on stock market overreaction in 1985 elaborated on value 
anomaly. We will discuss all these concepts later in the unit. 
The late 1990s and the early 2000s saw behavioural finance becoming part of 
mainstream finance. It was able to explain the reasons behind many market 
anomalies. Many concepts were developed during this time such as (i) limit 
to arbitrage, (ii) myopic loss aversion, (iii) over-reactions, and under-
reactions of the market. This decade also saw research in the area of irrational 
investors and the behavioural mistakes they make. Robert Shiller's famous 
book ‘Irrational Exuberance’ in 2000 rightly predicted the crash of the dot-
com stock market bubble and spread the ideas of behavioural finance as a 
parallel field of traditional finance, an understanding of which could increase 
the predictability of the stock market. Around the same time, Andrei Shleifer 
also worked to explain how noise traders in the financial market lead to 
limited arbitrage and cause market anomalies. Further, the Nobel Prize for 
two consecutive years (2001 and 2002) increased the popularity and 
acceptance of behavioural finance. You may be aware that the Nobel Prize 
was awarded in 2001 to George Akerlof, Michael Spence, and Joseph Stiglitz 


--- Page 90 ---
294 
Financial Stability “for their analyses of markets with asymmetric information” and to Daniel 
Kahneman in 2002 for “having integrated insights from psychological 
research into economic science, especially concerning human judgment and 
decision-making under uncertainty”.  
As of now, the field of behavioural finance is still evolving and is a popular 
research area. The psychological, cognitive and sociological foundations of 
financial decision-making are still being explored to have a better 
understanding of the markets. However, behavioural finance is criticized for 
being “Micro-efficient” and not “Macro-inefficient”, i.e., it can explain 
individual behaviour of investors effectively but is not very useful in 
predicting the overall market. We can explain market anomalies through 
behavioural finance in the long run, but if we try to predict variations in the 
stock market in the short run we will not be very successful. The field is still 
growing, with more and more research to understand sources of irrational 
behaviour and market anomalies. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) Compare and contrast traditional finance with behavioural finance.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
2) Discuss the growth and evolution of behavioural finance.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
3) Traditional theory assumes that investors are______________________
whereas behavioural finance considers investors to be
__________________________
a) Rational, rational
b) rational, irrational
c) irrational, irrational
d) irrational, rational


--- Page 91 ---
295 
Behavioural Finance 4) Which one of the following is not true about behavioural finance?
a) It assumes the availability of complete information to everyone in
the market.
b) It considers issues such as self-control in investors and examines
how it affects decision making which in turn affects the whole
market.
c) it centres around the idea of bounded rationality.
d) There is a limit to arbitrage, and prices are not always right and may
stay in a non-equilibrium state for certain periods.
29.5 EFFICIENT MARKETS HYPOTHESIS AND 
ANOMALIES 
29.5.1  Efficient Market Hypothesis and its Critique 
We have already discussed the concept of ‘efficient markets hypotheses’ 
(EMH) in Unit 25. According to EMH, market prices fully reflect all 
available information. The EMH is one of the important cornerstones of 
traditional finance theories. It was developed independently by Paul A. 
Samuelson and Eugene F. Fama in the 1960s and has been applied 
extensively in traditional finance. In an efficient market, all relevant 
information is freely available to profit-maximizing rational investors who 
are trying to predict the value of various securities. According to EMH, 
markets are rational and prices of stocks fully reflect all available 
information. Since such information is readily available, the price of 
securities quickly adjusts to the change. The idea behind EMH is that when 
some new information arises or any event occurs, the news spreads very 
quickly and is incorporated into stock prices. For example, if a currency note 
is lying on the road, it will not be there for long as it will be surely picked up 
by someone. Similarly, all information is picked up by market agents and 
used in decision-making. Current prices are considered to be the best 
approximation of a company’s intrinsic value. 
The EMH is associated with the idea of a “random walk”. According to the 
random walk theory, past movements or trends of a stock price (or financial 
market) cannot be used to predict its future movement and it is not possible to 
outperform the market without assuming additional risk. The logic behind the 
random walk theory is that stock prices reflect information or news about the 
stocks. Since the news is unpredictable, today’s situation or price cannot be 
used to predict future values. As such, experienced investors do not have any 
added advantage over uninformed investors. 
Behavioural finance, on the other hand, believed in ‘momentum’ in short-run 
stock prices. According to behaviour finance, investors follow market trends, 
i.e., if they notice a rise in the price of a stock, they invest in the market in a


--- Page 92 ---
296 
Financial Stability kind of “bandwagon effect.” leading to sometimes what is called ‘irrational 
exuberance’, i.e., investor enthusiasm that leads to rising in a stock price 
higher than its fundamental value. Another rationale for ‘momentum’ as 
given by behavioural finance is the investor’s under-reaction to the new 
information. Investors take time to change their existing perception or 
understanding of a particular stock. Thus, the full impact of any news or 
announcement is realized over a period leading to a positive correlation in 
prices (thus, changes in prices are not random) 
Another significant critique of behavioural finance was regarding 
assumptions about human Behaviour. They critiqued the rationality 
assumption by classical finance and focused on sociological, psychological 
and cognitive influences leading to behavioural anomalies. Behavioural 
finance documented various departures from a classical paradigm in the form 
of behavioural biases that guide investor behaviour especially while deciding 
under uncertainty. Many times, these biases lead to irrational behaviour and 
ultimately to sub-optimal outcomes in the market. Some of the biases that we 
will discuss in this unit are herding, overconfidence, overreaction, loss 
aversion, and mental accounting which dominate the thinking process of an 
investor. These biases in turn lead to market anomalies such as the ‘equity 
premium puzzle’ (Stocks have earned disproportionately higher returns over 
the years yet investors are relatively unwilling to hold them), the ‘volatility 
puzzle’ (Stock returns are highly variable with large dispersions) and the 
‘predictability puzzle’ (Stock returns are predictable suggesting that 
persistent profits are not being eroded by arbitrage). 
29.5.2  Market Anomalies 
Anomalies are occurrences that deviate from the predictions of the efficient 
markets hypothesis and undermine its core assumptions. (Tversky & 
Kahneman 1986) defined market anomalies as “an anomaly is a deviation 
from the presently accepted paradigms that are too widespread to be ignored, 
too systematic to be dismissed as random error and too fundamental to be 
accommodated by relaxing the normative system”. 
Anomalies can be of three types: (i) Fundamental Anomalies, (ii) Technical 
Anomalies, and (iii) Calendar or Seasonal Anomalies 
i) Fundamental Anomalies
 Value Anomaly: It refers to the over-estimation of future earnings
and returns of growth companies.
 Low Price to Book: It is often noticed in the stock market that the
stocks having a high book-to-market ratio generate less return than
the stocks with a low price-to-book ratio.
 High Dividend Yield: There is a positive correlation between yield
and stock return. Stocks with high dividend yields outperform the
market and generate more returns.


--- Page 93 ---
297 
Behavioural Finance  Neglected Stocks: The prior neglected stocks generate more return
subsequently over some time. Accordingly, the prior best performers
underperform the index.
 Low Price to Earnings (P/E): The stocks with low price-to-earnings
ratios are likely to generate more returns and outperform the market,
while the stocks with high price-to-earnings ratios tend to
underperform in the market.
ii) Calendar Anomalies
Calendar anomalies reflect an irregular pattern of stock returns in various
periods, i.e., movement in stock prices from day to day, month to month,
year to year etc. Some of the Calendar anomalies are as follows:
 Weekend Effect: The stock prices are likely to fall on Monday, i.e.,
the closing price of Monday is less than the closing price of the
previous Friday.
 Turn-of-the-Month Effect: It reflects the tendency of stock prices to
increase in the last trading day of the following month, and the first
three days of next month.
 Turn-of-the-Year Effect: This anomaly describes the increase in the
prices of stocks and trading volume of the stock exchange in the last
week of December and the first half month of January.
 January Effect: The tendency of small-company stocks to generate
more return than another asset in the first two to three weeks of
January is called the January effect.
iii) Technical Anomalies
Various techniques can be used to forecast future stock prices based on
past prices and relevant information in the market. Traditionally,
researchers asserted that the market holds weak form efficiency, prices
already reflect all the information and everyone has all the information.
Thus, an investor cannot beat the market by earning abnormal returns.
But various market anomalies deviate from the traditional viewpoint:
 Moving Averages: Buying and selling signals of stocks can be
generated by long-period averages and short-period averages. A
purchase signal is created when short-period averages rise over long-
period averages. The best time to sell is when short-period averages
fall below the long-period averages.
 Trading Range Break: A breakout is a potential trading opportunity
that investors apply to make huge profits. This technique involves
identifying support and resistance levels along with current price
trends to identify possible entry and exit points. By buying or selling
at the right time, investors can make huge profits.


--- Page 94 ---
298 
Financial Stability 29.5.3  Market Puzzles and Behavioural Explanation 
Over time, Behavioural Finance has attempted to explain various market 
anomalies and puzzles. This section discusses about few popular puzzles in 
the stock market and their Behavioural explanation.  
i) Equity premium puzzle
The equity premium puzzle, first documented by Mehra and Prescott, refers 
to the empirical fact that stocks have greatly outperformed bonds over the last 
century. Stocks have earned disproportionately higher returns than bonds, 
however, people still buy bonds. The level of risk aversion required for such 
a choice by investors has to be very high. Thus, the equity premium puzzle 
cannot be explained in terms of risk aversion. Behavioural finance explains 
this puzzle in terms of ‘Prospect Theory’. The first explanation is provided in 
terms of ‘loss aversion’, i.e., investors are more sensitive to losses than to 
gains. Secondly, investors are myopic, i.e., investors are assumed to evaluate 
their portfolio frequently even if they are saving for their retirement. Thus, 
myopic loss aversion explains the equity premium puzzle. Another 
explanation for the puzzle is provided through ‘ambiguity aversion’. 
Ambiguity aversion is a preference for known risks over unknown risks. 
Since the probability distribution of equity returns is unknown, people 
overweigh the probability of returns from bonds. 
ii) Volatility Puzzle
The volatility puzzle reflects the high variability of stock prices having large 
dispersions. It is observed in the stock market that changes in stock prices are 
disproportionately higher than the changes in fundamentals. This observation 
is against the theory of EMH according to which, prices always represent the 
fundamentals of the assets. 
Behavioural finance attempts to solve this puzzle through various biases that 
investors have. Various cognitive, social and emotional biases lead to sub-
optimal decision-making by the investors which in turn affect the stock 
market and stock prices. It is noticed that while making a decision, investors 
overweigh more recent information, and consensus beliefs and seek 
confirming evidence which makes them under-react or overreact in the 
market.  
Investors also tend to focus more on similar pieces of information called 
focal points which also affect their decision making. The reason behind the 
steep fall in prices rather than the upward correction is that people are loss-
averse and tend to overweigh negative information and feedback.  
iii) Predictability Puzzle
This puzzle states that stock returns are predictable from price-dividend 
ratios. Behavioural finance is explained in terms of behavioural biases like 
the disposition effect (the tendency to prematurely sell assets that have made 
