--- Page 45 ---
249 
Non-performing Assets UNIT 27 NON-PERFORMING ASSETS 
(NPAs) 
Structure 
27.0 Objectives   
27.1 Introduction  
27.2  Profile of Non-Performing Assets in India 
27.2.1  Nature of Non-Performing Assets 
27.2.2  Magnitude and Trend of NPAs 
27.2.3  Major Causes of NPAs 
27.3 Approach of RBI Towards Non-Performing Assets 
27.4 Impact of Non-Performing Assets 
27.5 Measures to Tackle the Problem of NPAs 
27.6 Effectiveness of Action Taken to Curb NPAs 
27.7 Recent Policy Measures towards NPAs 
27.8 Let Us Sum Up   
27.9  Key Words 
27.10  Some Useful Books and References 
27.11 Answer/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises  
27.12 Terminal Questions 
27.0 OBJECTIVES 
By going through this unit, you will be able to: 
 explain the concept of non-performing assets;
 identify the different kinds of NPAs;
 indicate the magnitude of NPAs in Indian Banks;
 identifying major causes of NPAs;
 describe the impact of NPAs on various sectors of the economy;
 highlight the role of RBI in NPAs;
 analyse the measures taken to tackle the problem of NPAs; and
 suggest measures for having effective policies for solving the menace of
NPAs.


--- Page 46 ---
250 
Financial Stability on27.1  INTRODUCTION 
The banking industry is a lending institution that helps millions of people get 
sufficient funds to carry out their operations. The banks are responsible for 
building financial stability in the nation. Over the world, NPAs in the 
banking sector are growing. NPAs are found to be at the centre of the 
economic problem of the banks. 
NPAs refer to the classification used by financial institutions for loans and 
advances that are in default or arrears. A loan is in arrears when the principal 
is due, or interest payments are late, or missed. NPAs can be classified as 
substandard assets, doubtful assets, or loss assets depending on the length of 
time overdue and the probability of repayment. It is important for both the 
borrower and the lender to be aware of performing versus non-performing 
assets. 
Banks improve the allocation of resources by lending money to priority 
sectors of the economy, but non-performing loans assume critical importance 
since they reflect the asset quality, credit risk and efficiency in the allocation 
of resources to productive sectors. The level of NPAs creates serious concern 
for the stability of the banking system. The financial health of the economy is 
deteriorating due to an upsurge in credit defaulters in the country.  
NPAs can be manageable. It depends on its magnitude and its past due 
period. In the short term, banks can tolerate a good amount of NPAs. A 
healthy financial sector is necessary for the growth of the economy. A 
profitable banking sector also has more capacity to absorb shocks and 
provide relative stability to the economy. The increasing trend in NPAs is 
testing banks’ strength and resilience (Guar & Mohapatra, 2020). The 
accumulation of NPAs in India cannot be attributed to a single event nor can 
it be confined to a particular timeline. The growth rate in the NPA level 
shows that the problem is evident not only with small-sized banks but also 
with major banks.  
In this unit, we focus on various aspects of NPAs such as nature, growth and 
magnitude of NPAs, factors responsible for NPAs, and impact of NPAs on 
the economy. Policy measures taken by the authorities have also been 
analysed along with suggestions for prevention of NPAs. 
27.2  PROFILE OF NON-PERFORMING ASSETS IN 
INDIA 
The NPAs refer to a class of loans or advances that are in default or arrears. 
For measurement purposes NPAs are classified into the following two types:  
i) Gross NPAs : This indicates the absolute amount of the total value of
loans that are due within 90 days in a particular quarter or financial year.
ii) Net NPAs : This indicates the net value of NPAs after the bank makes
specific provisions for it. It is arrived at by subtracting the doubtful and
unpaid assets from the gross NPAs.


--- Page 47 ---
251 
Non-performing Assets The above distinction reflects the quality of loans made by banks. Gross 
NPAs Ratio = Gross NPAs/Gross Advances. Net NPAs are those types of 
NPAs in which the banks deduct the provisions regarding NPAs. It shows the 
actual burden of banks. 
Net NPAs = Gross NPAs − Gross Advances − Provisions  
Gross NPAs is an absolute amount which is considered irrecoverable and 
shows the total value of NPAs for the bank in a particular financial year. On 
the other hand, Net NPAs provide the exact value of NPAs after making 
specific provisions for the particular asset. NPAs are listed on the balance 
sheet of a bank or lender. A loan can be classified as an NPA at any point 
during the term of the loan or at its maturity. Banks usually provide a grace 
period before classifying an asset as non-performing. Until and unless the 
loan asset is generating regular income with the expected usual commercial 
risk, that asset is known as a performing asset. If it fails to generate the 
expected revenue, then it is identified as an NPA. 
We must distinguish that all the performing assets of a bank are known as 
standard assets. Such standard assets are not treated as NPAs because such 
assets have a distinctive risk profile and do not require any supplementary 
provisions. 
27.2.1  Nature of Non-Performing Assets 
A loan is said to be in arrears when the principal amount or interest payments 
are late or missed and a loan is in default when the lender considers the loan 
agreement to be broken and the debtor is unable to meet the obligations. You 
should note that NPAs are recorded on a bank’s balance sheet only after a 
prolonged period of non-repayment by the borrower. 
Considering the nature of NPAs, the RBI has categorized them into three 
broad categories depending on the period of default. Banks are required to 
classify NPAs into one of three categories according to how long the asset 
has been nonperforming: sub-standard assets, doubtful assets, and loss assets. 
Let us define these categories.  
i) Sub-Standard Asset : Any loan or advance is a sub-standard asset if it
remains outstanding or NPA for a period less than or equal to 12 months.
ii) Doubtful Asset : Any loan or advance is a doubtful asset if it remains
outstanding or NPA for more than 12 months and is already classified as
a sub-standard asset.
iii) Loss Asset: Any loan or advance is a loss asset if it remains uncollectible
or has little to no recovery value, as its continuance as a bankable asset is
un-suggestible. Therefore, the bank may consider some recovery value
left in it as the asset has not been written off wholly or in parts. Given
this situation, banks are forced to accept that the loan will never be


--- Page 48 ---
252 
Financial Stability onrepaid, and must record a loss on their balance sheet. The entire amount 
of the loan must be written off completely. 
Although the most common NPAs are term loans, there are other forms of 
NPAs as well (Naveen J., 2022): 
i) Overdraft and cash credit (OD/CC) accounts left out-of-order for more
than 90 days.
ii) Agricultural loans/advances that are approved for short-period crops may
also be treated as NPA if the instalment of principal or interest thereon
remains unpaid for two crop seasons. On the other hand, if a loan is
approved for long-period crops, it may be treated as NPA, if the
instalment of principal or interest thereon remains unpaid for one crop
season.
iii) Expected payment on any other type of account is overdue for more than
90 days.
A loan becomes a non-performing asset after 90 days of non-repayment of 
loans. After non-payment, the bank asks the borrower to liquidate any assets 
or mortgage as a part of the loan agreement. If the borrower does not pledge 
any assets, then the bank may write off the loan as bad debt and sell it to a 
‘bad bank’ (for example, National Asset Reconstruction Company Limited 
(NARCL)). The bad banks aim to ease the burden on banks by taking the bad 
loans off their balance sheet. The NARCL is a public-sector asset 
reconstruction company in India. It is established to acquire and aggregate 
NPAs.  
27.2.2  Magnitude and Trend of NPAs 
It was only in the mid-1990s; post the economic liberalization when the 
country entered into the new millennium that the banks realized the sudden 
compounding of bad loans. The NPA situation essentially propelled in the 
mid-2000s following over-optimism in the economy specifically between 
2006 and 2008, on the back of strong economic growth and pending 
infrastructure projects completed on time and within specified budgets, a 
thing largely unheard of till then (Palli, 2020). 
The fact that the Gross NPA ratio (defined as the ratio of Gross NPA to total 
assets) of scheduled commercial banks was more than 11 per cent in March 
2018 (more than 14 per cent in the case of public sector banks). Over time, 
however, this ratio has declined. It was placed at a much better 8.2 per cent in 
March 2020 and 7.3 per cent in March 2021. In March 2024 the Gross NPA 
ratio was 2.8 per cent, according to the Financial Stability Report (FSR) of 
the RBI.  
The occurrence of fraud as a proportion of the gross advances of PSBs 
dropped from a peak of 1.32 per cent during the financial year 2013-14 to 
0.05 per cent during the financial year 2021-22. The improved detection and 


--- Page 49 ---
253 
Non-performing Assets reporting accompanied by the comprehensive steps taken to check frauds 
have resulted in a decline in the occurrence of such frauds (ET Bureau, 
2022). 
Credit is required for faster growth of the economy but any kind of 
macroeconomic shock can impact those outstanding advances badly and may 
turn them non-performing. According to the RBI, total net NPAs as of March 
31, 2022 amounts to ₹204,225.90 crore. The share of public sector banks in 
these NPAs stood at 75.75 per cent. The rest pertains to the private sector and 
foreign and small finance banks. See Table 27.1. 
Table 27.1: Net NPAs in Indian Banks as of March 31, 2022 
(Amount in ₹ Crores) 
Banks Net NPAs Percentage 
Public Sector Banks 154745.39 75.75 
Private Sector Banks 43733.24 21.44 
Foreign Banks 3022.72 1.48 
Small Finance Banks 2724.55 1.33 
Total 204225.90 100.00 
Source: RBI’s Statistical Tables Relating to Banks in India 2022. 
Movement of non-performing assets (NPAs) of scheduled commercial banks 
https://dbie.rbi.org.in/BOE/OpenDocument/1608101727/OpenDocument/opendoc/openDocu
ment.faces?logonSuccessful=true&shareId=2 
Due to increasing loan failures, the share of non-performing advances has 
increased substantially. The pace of credit defaulters has been rising due to a 
lack of proper monitoring and verification. The big corporate individuals 
make use of flaws in the law and fly away with the money of banks. There 
was a huge increase in NPAs in the fiscal year 2017-18 after that there was a 
decrease in NPAs (Jain et al., n.d.). 
It has been observed that a major portion of NPAs is contributed by several 
top industrialists — a dirty dozen in the case of India. Generally, the NPAs in 
agriculture and the priority sector are comparatively lower than that of the 
corporate houses (Sikdar, 2020). Most of the current NPAs originated during 
the mid-2000s, during a period of high economic growth and positive 
business outlook. This led to an easy flow of credit. The impact of ownership 
(public and private sector banks) significantly influences the gross and net 
NPAs. The NPAs of public sector banks were higher than that of private 
sector banks. 
After the global financial crisis of 2008, the Indian economy stagnated and so 
did the repayment capacity of these businesses. This contributed to what is 


--- Page 50 ---
254 
Financial Stability onnow known as India’s Twin Balance Sheet (TBS) problem, where both the 
banking sector (that gives loans) and the corporate sector (that takes and has 
to repay these loans) have come under financial stress. The twin balance 
sheet problem refers to a situation where the borrower (corporate sector) is 
under stress due to high debt, and the lender (banks) is under stress due to 
non-repayment of loans (NPAs). The balance sheets of both the borrower and 
the lender have problems.  
Most banks follow Early Warning Systems (EWS) for recognition of 
probable NPAs, but the actual procedure followed varies from bank to bank. 
Under this system, the banks monitor and track the portfolios of their 
customers regularly.  The EWS helps the banks to check the asset quality of 
the borrowers (corporate firms). The EWS (software) helps the banks to 
identify signs of distress which is not possible to check manually.  
As regards the decline in NPAs Chandrasekhar (2022) has rightly commented 
that “this may have occurred partly through the use of write-offs that erode 
the capital base of banks and also because of the time-bound moratorium on 
debt repayments announced as part of measures to address the effects of the 
pandemic on small units and other selected borrowers. In such circumstances, 
even though lending to micro, small and medium enterprises was partly 
guaranteed by the government, a rise in the NPAs ratio and further erosion of 
bank capital seems inevitable.” 
27.2.3  Major Causes of NPAs 
Accumulation of NPAs is a recurring attribute of financial crisis and financial 
stress as NPAs typically grow when a credit boom turns into a bust. Several 
factors affect the profitability of the banks. The factors can broadly be 
categorised into bank-specific and macroeconomic factors (Das & Uppal, 
2021). 
i) The bank-specific factors are:
a) non-performing advances,
b) deposits,
c) non-interest income,
d) interest income,
e) operational efficiency, and
f) capital adequacy.
ii) The macroeconomic factors are:
a) GDP growth,
b) rate of inflation, and
c) interest rate.


--- Page 51 ---
255 
Non-performing Assets The following are major reasons for the emergence and continuance of NPAs 
in India (Naveen J., 2022):  
i) From 2000-2008, the Indian economy was in a boom phase and banks,
especially public sector banks, started lending extensively to companies.
ii) With the financial crisis in 2008-09, corporate profits decreased and the
Government banned mining projects. The situation became serious with
the substantial delay in environmental permits, affecting the
infrastructure sector – power, iron, and steel.
iii) Taken together all these factors resulted in a rise in prices of raw
materials and a shortage of supply.
iv) Moreover, the relaxed lending norms adopted by banks and foregoing
analysis of the financials and credit ratings, especially of the big
corporate houses.
v) Due to the absence of:
a) credit information bureau,
b) poor lending strategies and low scrutiny by banks,
c) wilful defaults,
d) economic slowdown and government policies,
e) inadequate risk and supervision,
f) lack of adequate capital,
g) low level of technology,
h) dishonest and poor credit documentation,
i) concentration in few customers/groups,
j) corruption, political and government interventions etc.
There have been frauds of high magnitude that have contributed to rising 
NPAs. The top management of the banks was forced by politicians and 
bureaucrats to throw good money after bad in the case of unscrupulous 
borrowers. (Selvarajan, & Vadivalagan, 2013). Several bad loans were 
advanced by the banks often by compromising due diligence.  
In short, the reasons for growth in NPAs range from bank-specific to 
government policies. The factors that affect NPAs are kinds of advances, the 
credit value of borrowers, collateral securities, the absence of legitimate 
observation, inadequacy and inaccuracy in the credit assessment standards 
that have been set, the death of potential earning members in the family and 
the absenteeism of entrepreneurial information and sense on the borrower’s 
part (Singh & Arora, n.d.).  


--- Page 52 ---
256 
Financial Stability onIt is important to remember that business units engaged in infrastructural 
activities, base metal, textile, food processing, chemical, engineering etc. 
failed to make repayment of interest and principal amount on their loans and 
advances. Negligence and ineffectiveness of recovery tribunals etc. The NPA 
levels for some banks crossed the 20 per cent level. This meant that banks 
reached negative capital levels. In other words, the true value of bank 
deposits was below par. 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) Explain the nature of NPAs in India.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
2) How are NPAs recorded in Banks’ Balance sheets?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
3) Highlight the magnitude and trend of NPAs in recent years.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
4) What are Early Warning Systems (EWS) for the recognition of probable
NPAs?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
5) Explain the concept of a Twin Balance Sheet (TBS).
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
27.3 APPROACH OF RBI TOWARDS NON-
PERFORMING ASSETS 
The RBI took a simple but holistic approach to empower the banks. With the 
help of the Securities Exchange Board of India (SEBI), in 2015 the RBI 
introduced the ‘Strategic Debt Restructuring Scheme’. The objective of the 
scheme was to help financial institutions in recovering loans by taking over 


--- Page 53 ---
257 
Non-performing Assets distressed companies. This gave the banks substantial power in the 
management of companies, which defaulted in repaying the borrowings 
(Palli, 2020). 
For tackling the problem of NPAs, the RBI in 2019 issued fresh guidelines. 
According to these guidelines, defaults are to be recognized within 30 days. 
During this 30-day period, lenders may decide on the resolution strategy, 
including the nature of the resolution plan and its implementation. All lenders 
must put in place board-approved policies for the resolution of stressed 
assets, and it is expected that the lenders initiate the process of implementing 
a resolution plan even before a default. Further, the lenders shall report credit 
information on all borrowings aggregating over ₹ 50 million and submit a 
weekly report on any default. If a resolution plan is to be implemented, the 
lenders shall enter into an inter-creditor agreement (Palli, 2020). 
The RBI has come up with stringent norms so that the growth of NPAs can 
be put under control. The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code of 2016 plays an 
important role in the recovery of assets of those creditors whose case has 
been filed with the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT). Only time will 
tell how successful has the RBI been in controlling the NPA growth in the 
sector (Agarwala & Agarwala, 2019). 
The RBI has underlined regulatory changes in India in recent years. These 
range from a prudential asset-liability management framework for domestic 
banks and curbs on total leverage to the systematic plugging of regulatory 
arbitrage between banks and other financial entities. Recently, RBI Governor 
cautioned banks against any build-up of asset-liability mismatches, saying 
both are detrimental to financial stability and hinted that the ongoing crisis in 
the US banking system seems to have emanated from such mismatches. He 
emphasised the fact that the ongoing US banking crisis also clearly shows the 
risks of private cryptocurrencies to the financial system (The Hindu Business 
Line, March 17, 2023). 
The RBI has been taking a series of measures to strengthen Indian banks and 
the financial system as a whole. Depositors should repose faith in its ability 
to safeguard their interests. But in the long term, it is the full implementation 
of international standards in regulation, supervision, governance, resolution 
and deposit insurance that will best help convince the markets of the stability 
of the banking system. 
27.4  IMPACT OF NON-PERFORMING ASSETS 
A strong banking sector is important for the Indian economy. The failure of 
the banking system may hurt other sectors. The rising NPAs are a cause of 
concern. It on the one hand reduces their interest earning and, on the other 
hand, also affects their future deposits and increases their operating cost as 
the cost of recovery of NPAs will go up. NPAs generate a vicious cycle of 
effects on the sustainability and growth of the banking system, and if not 
managed properly could lead to bank failure (LSS, 2014). For the bank or 


--- Page 54 ---
258 
Financial Stability onlender, interest earned on loans acts as a major source of income. NPAs place 
a financial burden on the lender. A large volume and significant number of 
NPAs over some time is an indication of the fact that the bank is in jeopardy. 
This situation makes RBI, the regulator, aware of the weakening financial 
fitness of the bank.  
NPAs hurt the rate of profit of the Indian banks. NPAs negatively affect 
banks’ ability to generate income and profitability. As such, it is incumbent 
on banks to keep constant track of their NPAs to avoid adverse effects on 
their liquidity and capacity to grow. If the volume of NPAs continues to 
increase over some time, it can threaten the financial health of the bank. 
Higher NPAs influence the price of loans and interest rates, which in turn 
affects the confidence of investors, lenders, and depositors equally. While 
higher interest rates will directly impact the investors in need of loans for the 
creation of infrastructural and industrial projects, they also cause poor 
recovery of funds, which will affect the credit creation and revenue stream of 
the banks. The non-recovery of loans affects credit creation and further 
affects the financial soundness of an economy (Hafsal et al, 2020). 
There is a positive relation in the banking industry between total income and 
gross NPAs, whereas a negative relation is in the case of total profit and gross 
NPAs. This means that with an increase in total income, there is an increase 
in NPAs on the contrary there will be a decrease in profit with an increase of 
NPAs (Jain et al n.d.). NPAs have a significant negative impact on the 
profitability of scheduled commercial banks measured in terms of return on 
assets and return on equity. 
It enhances the risk of credit default and even affects the image of banks in 
the nation. Lender’s reputation is decreasing due to the continuous increase in 
the defaulters, not paying back the bank’s money on time. The overall 
reputation of the banks is at stake due to increased NPAs and the upsurge in 
the number of depraved loans (Jain, et al, n.d.) 
The rise in NPAs occurred with the deterioration of the balance sheets of 
non-financial firms, and this twin balance sheet crisis contributed 
significantly to the deceleration of growth in the late 2010s. NPA write-offs 
do erode the capital base, which has been only partially neutralised in the 
case of public sector banks by the government’s recapitalisation effort 
(Chandrasekhar, 2022). 
NPAs increase borrowing costs for the general public, because banks may 
increase their lending interest rates to maintain balance in their costs and 
profits. A rise in NPAs beyond the risk threshold can have significant effects 
on the stability of the banks, reducing consumer confidence in the 
functioning of these banks. In general, NPAs affect the morale and 
confidence of all the stakeholders associated with the operation of banks. The 
challenge of NPAs has made the banks risk-averse. They hesitate to extend 
