--- Page 1 ---
205 
Macroeconomics, 
Finance, and 
Business Cycles 
Block 7 
Financial Stability 
Unit 24 Macroeconomics, Finance, and Business Cycles 
Unit 25 Efficient Markets Hypothesis 
Unit 26 Financial Stability and Related Issues 
Unit 27 Non-performing Assets 
Unit 28 Foreign Exchange Stability and Related Issues 
Unit 29 Behavioural Finance 


--- Page 2 ---
206 
Financial Stability UNIT 24 MACROECONOMICS, FINANCE 
AND BUSINESS CYCLES 
Structure 
24.0  Objectives 
24.1  Introduction 
24.2  Macroeconomics and Business Cycles 
24.2.1 Case Study: The Great Depression (1929-1941) 
24.3  Finance and Economy 
24.3.1 Financial System 
24.3.2 Asymmetric Information, Adverse Selection, Moral Hazard 
24.3.3 Case Study: Satyam Computers  
24.4  Financial Crisis 
24.4.1 Case Study: The Great Recession (2007-2009) 
24.5 Financial Crises and Economic Crises 
24.6 Policy Responses to a Crisis 
24.7 Let Us Sum Up 
24.8 Key Words 
24.9 Some Useful References 
24.10 Answers / Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
24.0 OBJECTIVES 
After reading this Unit, you should be able to: 
 identify macroeconomic issues in an economy;
 identify the examples of business cycles;
 explain the functioning of the financial system;
 identify asymmetric information and its effects;
 define financial crisis; and
 explain the linkages between the financial crisis and working of the
economy.
24.1 INTRODUCTION 
As discussed in previous blocks, the financial system plays an important role 
in the economy and has always been an interesting subject for economists 
and policymakers. In the present-day world, the financial sector of a country 


--- Page 3 ---
207 
Macroeconomics, 
Finance, and 
Business Cycles 
is very important not only for advancement or growth but also for the 
stability of the economy. We have discussed in Unit 1 that the financial 
system includes three key elements: (i) financial institutions, (ii) financial 
markets, and (iii) financial instruments. The major function of the financial 
system in an economy is to work as an intermediary between lenders (or, 
savers) and borrowers (or, investors). Governments, corporations/business 
firms and individuals borrow from the financial markets to fulfil their 
objectives and invest their savings in financial instruments to grow their 
wealth. These decisions, in turn, affect macroeconomic variables like 
aggregate demand, output, employment, and prices. Macroeconomic 
variables affect financial conditions in a country and the developments in the 
financial sector are important for capital formation which is a prerequisite for 
the growth and development of the economy. However, we have also seen 
that at times, the developments in the financial sector leads to 
macroeconomic instability. The memory of the financial crisis of 2007-08 in 
the USA which spread across the globe within a short span of time, which is 
also known as the Great Financial Crisis or the Great Crash, and its after-
effects on the world economy are very fresh. In this unit, we will extend our 
understanding of financial systems and examine the interconnection between 
Macroeconomics, finance and business cycles.  
24.2 MACROECONOMICS AND BUSINESS 
CYCLES 
In simple terms, macroeconomics is the study of the economy as a whole, 
i.e., how the economy works. It is focused on important issues like 
employment, inflation, output or GDP, growth rate, exchange rate, balance of 
payments, and business cycles. In short, we can say that it deals with the most 
important economic issues and problems of society. These important issues 
are dealt with mainly by two questions. One, how is the GDP of a country 
determined in the short run and the long run? Second, how is GDP (or the 
process of GDP determination) affected by macroeconomic variables such as 
consumption, investment, inflation and unemployment? 
One of the major factors responsible for the growth of an economy is capital 
formation. Over the years, many financial innovations have taken place 
which have helped not only in building a capital base of the economy but also 
in the expansion of markets and wealth. But, the process or path of economic 
growth is not smooth or stable. Economies of different countries have 
experienced wide fluctuations in variables like employment, output, and 
prices over the past three centuries. Various kinds of explanations have been 
provided for economic fluctuations or business cycles ranging from the lack 
of aggregate demand to real business cycle models. Depending upon the kind 
of explanation, solutions for stabilising the economy have also been 
suggested. It has also been experienced that business cycles are often related 
to problems in the financial sector of the economy. 


--- Page 4 ---
208 
Financial Stability Business Cycles:  It refers to ups and downs in economic activities namely, 
output, unemployment, and income among other things. The business cycle is 
an indication of how an economy is doing. A business cycle has four 
different stages predominantly. The first stage of a business cycle is an 
economic expansion. It is when the investment is increasing due to lower 
interest rates, output increases, and employment increases. The second stage 
is when the economic activities are at their peak and thus, the economy is 
doing extremely well. Often, it is considered that if there is a boom there is 
going to be a burst eventually. So, in short, in the first stage of a business 
cycle, the output is high, demand is high, income is high, unemployment is 
less, consumption is high, and investment is high. The second stage is when 
the economic activities are at their peak and thus, the economy is doing 
extremely well. In the third stage of a business cycle, aggregate demand goes 
down, the output starts to slow down, investment slows down, employment 
falls, income falls, and thus consumption also decreases. In the fourth stage 
of the business cycle, the condition is worse and a depression follows. 
Aggregate demand further decreases, investment decreases, production 
decreases again, and more layoffs happen. 
The business cycle acts as a vicious cycle. Starting from a boom to a 
recession and then to a depression. One thing leads to another. For example, a 
lack of demand in one sector might lead to a reduction in investment and 
production which leads to loss of employment, a reduction in income and 
again a decrease in aggregate demand.    
24.2.1  Case Study: The Great Depression (1929-1941) 
In the 1920s the growth rate in the US was high (4.7%) and the 
unemployment rate was very low (3.2%). There was an exorbitant growth in 
wealth. With this high wealth, the investment by the public increased in the 
stock market. The regulations were weak in the stock market which had led 
to higher speculation in the market. Eventually, the stock market crashed in 
1929. On October 24, 1929, the market opened down by 11% from the 
previous day. This is known as the ‘Black Thursday’. In the following days, 
the market fell further. From 1929 to 1932, the stock market decreased by 
85%. During the peak of the great depression, the unemployment rate was as 
high as 24%. A lot of blame was put on banks that had advanced too many 
loans by decreasing their reserves gradually. It was coupled with the 
expansionary monetary policy (increased money supply) which led to 
increased levels of borrowing. After the stock market crash instead of 
decreasing the rate of interest the Federal Reserve did the opposite and the 
rate of interest was increased. The approach was that the troubled banks 
would fall and a strong system would emerge. The increase in interest rate 
led to deflation (the opposite of inflation, prices decrease). At the same time 
higher tariff was imposed on agricultural imports to protect agriculture in the 
US which further contributed to the great depression. In 1933, President 
Roosevelt increased government spending but it was too late by then. Within 
the four years of the recession, the GDP of the US decreased by 29%. 


--- Page 5 ---
209 
Macroeconomics, 
Finance, and 
Business Cycles 
Unemployment was at the highest (24%) level in 1933 when 1 out of every 4 
people was unemployed. 30% of the banks failed. The standard of living 
decreased. Many factories had shut down. Rural poverty increased rapidly. 
The birth rate declined, and women’s participation in the workforce 
increased. The great depression eventually ended in 1941. 
24.3 FINANCE AND ECONOMY 
We are generally faced with two kinds of situations. First, all of our income 
is not consumed and some of it is saved. For these savings, we look for 
options to earn some return, i.e., to invest our savings productively. Second, 
some people have business ideas or they have to do some transaction but do 
not have sufficient funds, i.e., they need funds.  In macroeconomics, savings 
and investment are very important concepts and help in understanding 
macroeconomic problems like growth, inflation and unemployment and their 
solutions. Investment in physical and human capital is very important for a 
country’s long-run growth. At the same time, it affects the macroeconomic 
stability, inflation and unemployment, in the economy. Savings are the most 
important component of funding investment, but every increase in savings 
may not be good for the health of the economy. It can lead to a shortage of 
aggregate demand in the economy. Moreover, it is also important how these 
savings are allocated to different investment options. Some options can be 
simply better than others in terms of productivity, outcome and impact on 
employment, inflation and other economic variables. The financial system of 
a country is generally helpful in providing solutions for the issues mentioned 
above. It provides productive investment options where savings can be 
invested and at the same time, the people in need get the opportunity to 
borrow the desired funds. It provides an efficient way to allocate the funds 
among different uses. 
The financial sector is considered to be different from the real economy. The 
real economy produces goods and services with the help of the factors of 
production, land, labour, and capital. It provides us with consumption goods 
like food, furniture, clothes, and capital goods like plant, machinery, 
transportation, etc. What happens in the real economy determines an 
economy’s capacity to produce and consume in the long run, and also affects 
several variables like inflation, unemployment, and distribution of income 
and wealth which in turn affect the economy itself. On the other hand, the 
financial sector provides the mechanisms and channels through which the 
lenders and borrowers coordinate in the market and facilitate transactions in 
the real economy. Efficient working of the financial system is very much 
desirable to increase the productivity in the economy, so that, the funds can 
be directed to those activities which are most productive. It is usually thought 
to be limited to the movement of funds in the economy to help the real 
economy. We can see that employment in this sector is increasing day by 
day. The financial system of a country not only channels the funds in the 


--- Page 6 ---
210 
Financial Stability right direction but in doing so generates well-paid jobs and builds wealth for 
many which in turn would have an impact on activities like consumption and 
production. It is often a matter of debate whether the financial sector helps in 
the development of the economy or if it is a result of economic development, 
both of these arguments are true. 
24.3.1  Financial System 
The financial sector, today, is a very important sector for almost all 
economies. The major function of this sector is to provide channels for the 
movement of funds between borrowers and lenders. Lenders and borrowers 
can be individuals, households, business firms, governments and foreigners. 
Lenders and borrowers can interact through organised or formal financial 
markets or outside these markets. The transactions done outside the organised 
financial markets are, generally, riskier and costlier as compared to the 
formal markets. The financial system of a country helps in reducing the 
transaction costs and risks involved in financial transactions. As a country 
develops, its financial market also develops along with it and the proportion 
of the transactions outside formal financial markets declines with economic 
development.  
The financial system includes financial institutions like banks, insurance 
companies, mutual funds etc. and financial markets like stock markets, bond 
markets etc. In financial markets, lenders can directly provide funds directly 
to the borrowers. For example, suppose Reliance Industries wants to expand 
its business and for that purpose needs some funds. It can directly sell bonds 
to individuals in the bond market or it can bring an IPO (initial public 
offering) in the stock market which can be subscribed by individuals, banks, 
and companies. This is direct finance . In this case, the individuals or the 
companies who have savings are directly lending their money to the borrower 
or buying stocks of a company. This requires a lot of information and 
expertise to deal directly with the financial markets. On the other hand, 
instead of lending directly to the borrower, an individual can do it through 
some intermediary. For example, I have some savings and I want to invest 
these savings profitably. I can deposit my money in a bank, I can invest in a 
mutual fund, I can buy some insurance, or I can participate in some pension 
scheme. Financial institutions like banks, mutual funds, insurance funds or 
pension funds receive money from the lenders and lend it to the borrowers. 
This is indirect finance. 
In financial markets, there are different kinds of risks present for individuals, 
firms, and financial intermediaries. There is a risk that the deposits or the 
credit given may not be paid back partially or fully, known as credit or 
default risk . Financial intermediaries including banks may find themselves 
unable to meet the liquidity demands due to sudden and unexpected increases 
in the demand for liability payments or withdrawal of deposits, known as 
liquidity risk . Volatility in the interest rates and asset prices can deteriorate 
the financial health or the balance sheets, known as interest rate and price 


--- Page 7 ---
211 
Macroeconomics, 
Finance, and 
Business Cycles 
risk. Volatility in the exchange rate affects the value of assets and liabilities 
held in foreign currency and may worsen the balance sheets, known as the 
exchange rate risk . Due to one or more risks mentioned above, the value of 
assets of financial intermediaries, or firms and individuals, may fall below 
liabilities leading to insolvency. One of the important reasons for the risk is 
asymmetric information . One of the important aspects of the functions of 
financial intermediaries is to assess and manage these risks. 
24.3.2  Asymmetric Information, Adverse Selection and Moral 
Hazard 
When, in a transaction, one party does not have the same information as the 
other party it is known as asymmetric information . For example, suppose 
there is a firm which is planning to undertake a new project and for this 
project firm borrows from the market. The firm has different assessments for 
the risks involved in the project, and prospects of the future return. But, while 
approaching the lenders or investors this firm may not reveal all the 
information related to the project it has. In this case, the lenders/investors 
would have less information than the borrower.  
It happens at times that we try to hide some information which may impede 
our chances to borrow from the market. Suppose, an individual or a firm is 
willing to undertake a very risky project and lenders or investors may not be 
willing to take that kind of risk. To get the necessary funding the borrower 
may hide facts or information about the risk and make best efforts to get the 
loan, and may even offer to pay a higher interest rate. If the lenders/investors, 
pursued by the borrower, invest in the project without knowing the risk it 
creates an adverse selection problem . Due to the risky nature of the project, 
the borrower may not be able to honour its liabilities, i.e., the risk of default. 
There is another problem that arises because of asymmetric information 
which is known as moral hazard. This may occur irrespective of whether 
there is an adverse selection or not; this takes place after the financial 
transaction has occurred. A borrower may divert the borrowed funds to some 
risky project or activity. For example, the firm may put its investment in risky 
bonds that might pay or not pay. If these risky bonds pay then the bank will 
get its money back and if not, then the firm will not be able to pay back and 
most likely will default. Another simple example of moral hazard is that 
suppose you have taken insurance for losses due to fire. After taking the 
insurance you may decide not to put in place an efficiently working fire 
safety system to cut down on costs.  
24.3.3  Case Study: Satyam Computers Scandal 
Satyam Computer Services Limited (popularly known as Satyam 
Computers), a company established in 1987, was the fourth biggest Indian 
company in the IT sector in the 2000s. It was one of the finest examples of 
India’s growth story. From 2003 to 2008, the annual growth rate of the 
company was 35 per cent. In January 2009, the Chairman and the founder of 
the company confessed that he had been manipulating the accounts of the 


--- Page 8 ---
212 
Financial Stability company. He inflated the balance sheet and showed the profits and cash 
which never existed. This false growth also inflated the stock prices of the 
company. This was done to obtain cheaper loans which were diverted to the 
real estate. The company’s auditors turned a blind eye to the wrongdoings. 
The company lost its customers, stock prices plumped, and investors lost 
billions. The company was acquired by Tech Mahindra in April 2009. In 
Indian corporate history, the Satyam scandal is a very fine example of 
corporate fraud. This highlights the problem of asymmetric information that 
led to adverse selection due to false information and moral hazard on the part 
of managers and auditors. This episode also highlights the importance of 
prudent regulation that would help in decreasing the information asymmetry 
and promote transparency.  
Check Your Progress 1 
1) Discuss different stages of business cycles.
.....................................................................................................................
.....................................................................................................................
.....................................................................................................................
..................................................................................................................... 
2) How important is the concept of asymmetric information for the
financial sector?
.....................................................................................................................
.....................................................................................................................
.....................................................................................................................
..................................................................................................................... 
3) What are the different kinds of risk associated with financial
transactions?
.....................................................................................................................
.....................................................................................................................
.....................................................................................................................
..................................................................................................................... 
24.4 FINANCIAL CRISIS 
The financial crisis can be understood as an upset in the financial markets in 
the form of wide fluctuations in asset prices like stocks or real estate. It is 
associated with fluctuations in the flow of credit and disruptions in the 
working of financial intermediaries and markets. Financial stability helps in 
better assessment and management of financial risk and thus helps in the 
efficient allocation of resources which in turn, promotes economic growth. 
Although, with financial innovations, the understanding of risk and its 


--- Page 9 ---
213 
Macroeconomics, 
Finance, and 
Business Cycles 
management has also improved it is not possible to avoid risk completely 
because of the uncertainty. 
The financial system is like a complex web of interactions between different 
players. For example, person A has invested money in Mutual Fund X, this 
mutual fund has invested money in another investment fund which has 
further invested money in a bank that has given a loan to a corporate firm. 
You have a financial claim over a part of the mutual fund. The amount of 
money you can get by selling your holding of the mutual fund depends upon 
many things. First, the price or value of the fund may be affected by the 
conditions of the market. Second, the value of underlying assets may further 
be a function of different variables. And third, if the mutual fund in question 
has sufficient liquidity. In financial markets, whether the contract between 
two parties will be honoured or not depends upon other parties who are 
linked to this contract by a chain of financial transactions. A disturbance at 
any point in this chain of transactions can cause financial turbulence in the 
market and it can be a reason for a financial crisis. Speculative activities in 
the financial markets along with asymmetric information are often the 
sources of financial fluctuations. There may be several other factors that may 
start or may increase the intensity of a financial crisis. 
It is not so that all the financial crises are the same in the nature and 
magnitude but they have some common elements. Usually, a financial crisis 
starts with an asset price boom. These elements are described in the following 
paragraphs: 
Asset Price Booms and Busts:  At times, the prices of financial assets like 
stocks or real estate properties increase by a large amount over their 
fundamental values. This is known as the asset-price bubble. Often, this is 
led by the optimism of the investors about the future value of the asset. This 
may also happen because of a significant increase in the availability of credit. 
With the easy availability of credit, investors may increase their investment 
in an asset they expect to give very good returns in the future. This kind of 
increase can be termed a credit boom or credit bubble. The optimism about 
the asset prices and credit boom can have a feedback effect on each other, 
which may further intensify the asset-price bubble. The asset price booms 
cannot last forever, even a small shock in the market can lead to the bust of 
the bubble. For example, if investors start to feel the future rate of return for 
the asset may be lower, they may start to withdraw their investment which 
will lead to a decline in the asset prices.  
Insolvencies of the financial institutions: At times, the loans given by the 
banks are secured by the collateral or mortgage of the asset for which the 
loan has been provided. When the prices of such assets decline, it will create 
problems for the lending banks. In case of defaults by the borrowers , the 
banks will not be able to recover their loans. This problem is further 
aggravated by the leveraging by the lending institutions. In an optimistic 
environment, to increase the amount of loans/credit banks often borrow from 
other financial institutions. The borrowed funds increase banks’ capacity to 


--- Page 10 ---
214 
Financial Stability lend. This process is known as leveraging. But in case of asset-price bust, the 
value of mortgage declines and banks are unable to recover their loans and 
thus, fall short of meeting their payment obligations. In this situation, the 
capital of the banks falls and they reduce their lending. Which may lead to a 
further decrease in asset prices. The value of the assets of the banks declines 
below the value of liabilities which ultimately leads to insolvency. 
Banking Failure (or Bank Runs): As the problems of the banks increase and 
banks start to go bankrupt, the depositors who do not want to lose their 
money, line up to withdraw their money from the banks. Though, some 
amount in deposits is insured by the governments, generally, it is very small. 
Banks do not have sufficient balances and they start to sell their assets. Asset 
prices are already low and it is hard to find buyers in the market. The selling 
of assets by the banks may lead to a rapid decline in asset prices. This is also 
known as a fire sale . Uncertainty about the health of the banks in the 
economy increases and people lose confidence in the safety of their deposits. 
This may lead to a full-fledged banking failure in the economy, i.e., several 
banks failing in a short duration.  
Credit Shortage and Debt Deflation: When some banks fail, capital 
decreases as it becomes harder to get new capital as a result of low 
confidence in the market. Banks cut down on lending, and it becomes harder 
for the firms, especially the smaller and medium-sized firms, to get loans 
from the banks. Consumer credit also goes down as scrutiny by the banks 
increases. With the increase in the difficulties of the financial sector, the flow 
of credit declines in the economy. Decreases in the quantum of credit not 
only affect the new investment opportunities but also the operations of the 
firm which rely on debt for running their operation. A decrease in consumer 
credit leads to a decline in consumption demand. This leads to a decline in 
the economic activities in the country, a recession, and prices fall which 
increases the problems for the business firms. With the decrease in the prices, 
in real terms, the debt of the firms increases, known as debt deflation. Prices 
and incomes fall while the debt burden increases which leads to insolvency of 
the firms. This generates a kind of vicious circle. Deterioration in the health 
of the financial sector creates a shortage of credit that leads to an economic 
downturn which in turn decreases the profitability and stock prices of the 
firms. This may lead to insolvencies in the economy further deteriorating the 
health of the financial sector. In a financial crisis, several financial and non-
financial firms collapse. 
24.4.1  Case Study: The Great Recession (2007-2009) 
From the great depression to the great recession, there were many 
recessionary periods in between. Out of these 2007 was the worst. Before this 
recession, there was the dot.com crisis in the US which was a crisis in the IT 
industry. To give a boost to this sector the US Federal Reserve decreased the 
rate of interest. Instead, this investment went to the real estate sector in the 
US. Soft loans were given for real estate properties. Multiple loans were 
advanced on the same mortgage. People who had poor credit history were 


--- Page 11 ---
215 
Macroeconomics, 
Finance, and 
Business Cycles 
also given loans. Banks who had these mortgages advanced financial 
instruments (shares, bonds, futures etc.) could not recover their dues. These 
financial instruments were even purchased by people sitting in other 
countries. There was a bubble in the real estate which was likely to burst. 
Ultimately, the prices in real estate started to fall. People defaulted on loans. 
Looking at the panic, people who had bought securities based on these 
mortgages started to exit. So, on one hand, people did not pay loans to banks 
and on the other hand the prices of their mortgage-based securities decreased. 
It was a double-edged sword for the banking system. The NPAs increased 
drastically. Major financial institutions collapsed in 2008. Lehman Brothers 
which was the 4 th largest bank at that time, collapsed in September 2008. 
Ultimately the recession had spread to another sector too. Initially, India did 
not see any significant impact but eventually, the impact could be seen 
through the financial sector and decreased demand for Indian exports by the 
US and Europe. As a result of this recession, output decreased by 4.3%. 
Banks failed; housing prices declined by 31.8 per cent; unemployment 
peaked at 10% in October 2009 while it was 5% in December 2007; public 
debt increased, and protectionism increased. 
24.5 FINANCIAL CRISES AND ECONOMIC 
CRISES 
The financial system is an integral part of the economy and, both in good 
times and bad times, it amplifies economic activities. As financial 
development helps in economic growth a financial crisis worsens the 
economic problems. It is not necessary that a financial crisis would lead to an 
economic crisis; an economic crisis may also be a cause for the financial 
crisis. Finance is a key factor in capital formation and business activities. 
When finance deteriorates it has a severe impact on economic activities. As 
we have discussed, during a financial crisis asset prices and price levels and 
at the same time, an increase in interest rates cause a decrease in the 
profitability of the firms. Credit crunch and a decline in profitability lead to a 
decrease in overall economic activities. The defaults and insolvency in non-
financial firms would increase. 
As a financial crisis looms a country’s capital may fly to other countries in 
search of safer investment opportunities. It would have a twofold impact on 
the country. One, it would further deteriorate the credit crunch in the 
economy. Second, with a flight of capital exchange rate will be affected 
adversely which will impact the trade. Trade disturbance would aggravate the 
economic turbulences. 
An economic crisis can also create financial crisis. An economic downturn 
would decrease the sales and profitability of the firms which would lead to an 
increase in defaults in the repayments of loans they have borrowed from 
financial institutions. This would hurt the balance sheets of the banks and 
other financial institutions may further lead to a financial crisis. 
