--- Page 95 ---
299 
Behavioural Finance financial gains, while holding on to assets that are losing money), momentum 
effect (the tendency of stocks that performed well in the past months to 
continue to do well in the following period and vice versa for stocks with a 
poor performance. 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) List the various market anomalies observed in the market.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
2) What is the behavioural explanation of the equity premium puzzle?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
3) Explain the volatility puzzle from a behavioural perspective.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
4) Which of the following explains the Equity premium puzzle?
a) Under-reaction
b) Disposition effect
c) Momentum effect
d) Myopic loss aversion
29.6  IRRATIONAL INVESTOR: COGNITIVE, 
SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL INFLUENCES 
ON AN INVESTOR 
Behavioural finance replaces the idea of rational decision-makers called 
‘econs’ with ‘humans’ who are influenced by cognitive, social and emotional 
factors. Humans often are more biased than logical while making financial 
decisions. Before we discuss the biases that affect human decision-making, 
let us discuss how humans make decisions. You must have noticed that some 
decisions like morning routine, going to the office etc. are automatic but 
some decisions like financial investments etc. require attention, focus and 
analysis. In real life, decision-making is a complex process and is influenced 
by context, cues, social norms and past experiences.  


--- Page 96 ---
300 
Financial Stability When faced with difficult situations, people use heuristics or ‘rules of thumb’ 
to make decisions. These rules are imperfect but functional shortcuts that 
help investors simplify complex situations and make quick decisions.  
The concept of heuristics was first introduced by the economist and cognitive 
psychologist Herbert A. Simon in the 1950s. He used this approach to answer 
the question of how humans make decisions when the conditions for rational 
choice theory are not met, that is how people decide under uncertainty. He 
suggested that there were limitations to rational decision-making. 
Later, in the 1970s, psychologists Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman 
worked on ‘Heuristics’ to understand cognitive biases. Heuristics have since 
been used to explain the causes of irrational investors and why people’s 
intuitive judgement deviates from the rule. Kahneman has discussed how 
heuristics can be understood in terms of substitution, i.e., when faced with a 
difficult problem, the one that individuals are not able to address directly, 
they replace it with an easier question and answer that instead. For example: 
Instead of addressing the question: “How much profit this stock is going to 
make”, the investor will substitute the question: “What do I feel about this 
stock?” Substitution helps to provide quick answers but may lead to 
systematic and predictable errors called biases. In the above example, the 
investor has used the affect heuristic.  
29.6.1  Heuristics 
Four prominent heuristics are as follows: 
i) The anchoring and adjustment heuristic
According to the anchoring and adjustment heuristic, people employ a
certain starting point (“the anchor”) and make adjustments until they
reach an acceptable value over time. Anchoring is a cognitive bias where
investors rely on facts provided before a decision or an estimation is
made. The facts may be completely unrelated, but research shows that
they have a significant impact on the decision.
Anchoring heuristic is used by people when they have to estimate a value
with an unknown attribute. In such cases, people use some initial
“anchor” or default number which is then adjusted up or down based on
the information available. Approximations or final values derived by a
person using heuristics are often biased because anchors can never be
adjusted sufficiently. Anchoring and adjustment bias occurs when an
investor gives undue prominence to anchors which are most of the times
statistically irrelevant. Anchoring occurs to reduce the amount of
cognitive load placed on our brains.
For example: If you are asked to estimate the value of Reliance’s stock
after 4 months. Since the problem is difficult and there is uncertainty,
most people will apply anchoring and adjustment heuristics to find a
quick response. They would use the present value of the stock as an


--- Page 97 ---
301 
Behavioural Finance anchor and will adjust up or down based on any other information that 
they have. This may lead to a biased answer as an investor is looking at 
information from a twisted lens, i.e., with the present value of the stock 
in mind. 
Property dealers often use ‘anchors’ to start negotiations. They quote 
higher prices for the property to set an anchor and bargain the deal to 
give satisfaction to the customer who is influenced by the initial anchor.  
ii) The Representativeness Heuristic
According to Kahneman and Tversky (1972), representativeness means,
that in situations of uncertainty, people “evaluate the probability of an
uncertain event, or sample, by the degree to which it is: (i) similar in
essential properties to its parent population; and (ii) reflects the salient
features of the process by which it is generated”. Often people choose
options or make decisions based on representative information rather
than logical and probabilistic reasoning. This heuristic causes judgment
errors such as neglecting base rate (people tend to ignore general
information or base rate when specific information is also provided),
conjunction fallacy (people assume that certain specific conditions are
more likely than general conditions) and applying the law of small
numbers (exaggeration of the degree to which a small sample will
resemble the population from which they are drawn).
In the stock markets, investors often see the past performance of firms as
being representative of the firm’s future performance as well. Investors
are also seen to overweight the recent information to the detriment of the
past information. Thus, if a firm has been making huge profits for a few
years, investors might assume that the company will continue to perform
great in future also. Representative heuristic sometimes leads to stock
market overreactions and underreactions challenging the efficient market
hypothesis.
iii) The Availability Heuristics
In complex and uncertain situations, the brain tries to take a mental
shortcut to ease the decision-making process. These predictable shortcuts
are based on our past experiences and recent memories. The availability
heuristic is one such rule of thumb or shortcut. The Availability Heuristic
assess the probability of occurrence of the event based on the ease with
which it comes to the mind. It is governed by the principle that “if you
can think of it, it must be important.” Individuals believe that the things
they can recall more easily are more common and more accurate
representations of the real world. For instance, the ease with which you
can recall theft in your locality will determine how will you rate the law
and order situation in your locality. Though a recent crime may not be a
true representation of a law-and-order situation in your locality you will
overestimate the occurrence of such events because of the availability


--- Page 98 ---
302 
Financial Stability heuristic. This may lead to a cognitive bias as a recent event may not be 
the best representation of reality.  
Availability heuristic is widely seen in financial markets also. Recent 
market news or events events affect the investment decision more than 
the fundamentals of the company. Many times, this leads to an 
overreaction in the market which in turn might cause crashes or bubbles. 
In the case of a significant event, investors overestimate the probability 
of the occurrence of a similar event.  
One example of an Availability heuristic leading to bias is the case of 
‘hot hand’ where it is assumed that a person having a string of successes 
will continue with the string and will be successful. This bias was first 
noticed in the game of basketball (hence, the name ‘hot hand’) whereby 
the players who score maximum baskets keep on getting maximum 
passes even though they may be just average players. This bias is seen in 
the case of unrelated events like the roll of a dice or the flipping of a 
coin.  
In financial markets, investors also experience the bias of ‘hot hand’ 
when they are more likely to deal with traders who have recently 
performed exceptionally well in the market. In reality, there is no 
relationship between past performance and future performance.  
iv) The Affect Heuristic
Affect heuristic helps individuals to assign the probabilities of
occurrence of an event based on how a person feels about it. If a person
feels good about it, a higher probability is assigned to good
consequences and vice versa.
Affect heuristic lets the decisions affected by emotions and mood while
making a decision. People tend to make more risky decisions when they
are happy or in a positive state of mind.
The affect heuristic is most prominent when people do not have the
resources or time to reflect.
It is a bias in which emotions — fear, anxiety, surprise, pleasure —
influence and quicken a person’s decision-making process.
The affect heuristic may lead to overconfidence bias in an investor.
Investors may make sub-optimal decisions when emotions override logic
or facts.
For example: sometimes investors invest in a company’s stock because
“they have a good feeling about it”. Good feelings may not have
anything to do with the fundamentals of the company and thus, may lead
to irrational decisions.


--- Page 99 ---
303 
Behavioural Finance 29.6.2  Sources of Irrational Investor Behaviour 
As discussed in the previous sections, Behavioural finance postulates that 
investors are not completely rational, preference-consistent or unaffected by 
emotions. Investors are boundedly rational and influenced by cognitive 
biases, social factors and emotions. In this section, we will discuss cognitive, 
social and emotional influences on an investor. 
29.6.2.1  Cognitive Influences on Investor Behaviour 
i) Over-Confidence
Often it is seen in financial markets that people tend to attribute success
to their ability and failures to external factors. This is called self-
attribution bias. This makes them overconfident about their capability
which in turn leads to poor decisions regarding stocks. Overconfidence
also leads to excessive trading as people having too much confidence in
themselves buy too often for which they also have to sell too often (to
free up capital).
Another source of overconfidence in investors is hindsight bias.
Hindsight bias makes people believe after an event that they knew the
outcome of the event before it happened. For example: after a stock
market crash, many investors claim that they knew it was coming. When
an investor believes that he has exceptional foresight or intuition, it
makes him overconfident and more likely to take uncalculated risks.
ii) Cognitive Dissonance
Festinger’s theory of cognitive dissonance states that people feel internal
tension and anxiety when they are subjected to conflicting beliefs. Every
individual tries to reduce cognitive dissonance either by changing past
values or feelings or by trying to justify the decision. This is also
applicable to financial market investors who attempt to justify wrong
investment or decision. Cognitive dissonance leads to irrational
Behaviour of selling losers too late as they are not able to accept the fact
that they made a wrong decision.
This theory may apply to investors or traders in the stock market who
attempt to rationalize contradictory behaviour. Investors sell losers too
late as they are not willing to accept that they made a wrong decision.
They also try to avoid feelings of regret or embarrassment of reporting a
loss as a result of poor investment decisions.
iii) Under-reaction and Overreaction in the Market
Investors are often biased in perceiving any new information relative to
their prior beliefs. Thus, if any new information or news is against their
existing beliefs, they underweigh it and initially underreact to it. In the
weeks following the information, they start to adjust their investments.


--- Page 100 ---
304 
Financial Stability Similarly, when any new information, news or announcements are 
similar to their existing beliefs, investors overreact to it. Both 
underreaction and overreaction are irrational investor Behaviour and lead 
to sub-optimal decision-making. This leads to stock market volatility. 
iv) Disposition Effects
The disposition effect refers to the tendency to prematurely sell assets
that have made financial gains while holding on to assets that are losing
money. Investors sell profitable investments to make quick profits while
holding on to losing investments in the hope of converting them into
gains. The disposition effect reflects irrational behaviour as investors
lose out on possible gains due to momentum when they sell winning
assets too quickly.
Daniel Kahneman has explained the disposition effect through Prospect
theory. According to the theory, investors become risk-averse after gains
and choose to realise the gain rather than risk losing it. On the other
hand, investors become risk-seeking after a loss and hold on to the risky
asset.
v) Diversification Bias
People seek more variety when they choose multiple items for future
consumption simultaneously than when they make choices sequentially,
i.e., on an ‘in the moment’ basis. Diversification is non-optimal when
people overestimate their need for diversity. When they have many
options, they diversify even if it is in their best interest to invest in a
single asset.
On the other hand, sometimes investors diversify insufficiently.
Availability heuristics and familiarity biases lead to heavy investment
towards companies from investors’ home countries. There is no
economic justification for the home bias but familiarity reduces the
perception of risks.
vi) Mental Accounting
Mental accounting refers to a set of cognitive operations that investors
use to keep track of their financial investments. Investors classify their
money differently based on various subjective criteria. Investors invest in
both safe and speculative assets and keep these investments in different
mental accounts so that negative returns from speculative assets cannot
affect the positive returns from safe assets. Thus, investors keep money
that they can afford to lose for speculative purposes. Rationally, there
should be no division between safety capital and money that an
individual can afford to lose. This mental bias often leads people to make
irrational decisions and financially counterproductive investment
decisions.


--- Page 101 ---
305 
Behavioural Finance 29.6.2.2  Social Influences on Investor Behaviour 
i) Herding
Herding in financial markets generates speculative bubbles when traders
are tracking the decisions of others rather than the fundamental value of
assets.
Investors with herding instincts follow others and make similar
investments rather than trusting their analysis. Herd instinct can lead to
Asset bubbles, panic buying or selling and can be very detrimental to the
market.
Herding is the outcome of social learning when people believe that
others are better informed and thus follow the crowd. During financial
speculation, it is seen that investors buy at exorbitantly high prices not
because they think that the asset is worth it but because they believe that
others think it is.
ii) Reputation
Herding often emerges as a reputation concern as well. Keynes
postulated that it is rational and follow the crowd and herd as it helps to
maintain a good reputation. People believe that it is better to fail
conventionally than to succeed unconventionally
iii) Beauty contests
Financial beauty contests were first used by Keynes to describe the
second-guessing that characterizes financial speculation. The beauty
contest is a newspaper competition where competitors are asked to select
from a series of photos which according to them will be liked by the
majority of people. It is similar to iterated reasoning used in financial
speculation. Speculators are interested in identifying short-term
investment plans of others and not what they think will be the best
investment.
Financial speculations subject asset prices to financial loops which in
turn might lead to financial instability. Instability is magnified if
borrowings are the source of asset funding.
iv) Success Stories and Advice from Family
Investors are also affected by success stories and advice from the family.
It was found in various research studies that people tend to invest more
when their neighbours and family members have made profits from
investing in the stock market. Interestingly, it was also found that
investors are not negatively influenced by the failures of people around
them mainly because people share success stories more than failures.


--- Page 102 ---
306 
Financial Stability v) Expert Influence
Investors are also influenced by stock market experts. Analysts many
times have incentives to tout particular shares or are influenced by other
analysts or previously released information. This leads to herding and
inferior returns in the market.
29.6.2.3  Emotional Influences on Investors 
i) Feelings of Regret
Fear of regret deals with the emotional reaction that people experience
after realizing that they have made a mistake or error in making a
decision. When an investment goes bad, people act irrationally by trying
to avoid selling it to avoid feelings of regret. Sometimes investors avoid
the possibility of regret by following what other investors are doing.
They feel less embarrassed about losing money in popular investments
than in unpopular investments. The theory of Regret can be explained in
terms of cognitive dissonance which we have already discussed under
‘Cognitive influences on investor Behaviour’.
ii) Loss Aversion
Investors find losses to be disproportionately painful as compared to the
pleasure from the gains. Loss aversion makes people prefer things as
they are. People will overvalue things that they already own leading to
divergences between willingness to pay and willingness to accept.
People are willing to pay less for an object that they do not yet own than
they will accept when selling the same object that they already own. For
example: If you own an antique art piece worth a market price of Rs.
50,000, you will not be willing to pay Rs. 50,000 for it at this point but
would expect a much higher price for it if you sell it.
iii) Sunk Cost Fallacy
The sunk cost fallacy describes an emotional tendency to invest more
money, time, and effort into a project where we have already invested
even if a person knows that the investment is going to fail.
The sunk cost fallacy is closely linked to ‘loss aversion’. Investors
become emotionally involved in a stock or project that they are not
willing to accept the failure. Thus, they invest more money to make that
investment work. People have difficulty in letting go of the sunk cost and
they make additional mistakes like:
 Aggressive Investing: People who were risk averse initially become
more aggressive in investing after losing a certain amount of money.
They start taking undue risks which might lead to huge losses.
 Averaging: People invest more in the stocks where they have lost
money as they try to average out returns in those stocks. This may
lead to even more losses.


--- Page 103 ---
307 
Behavioural Finance Check Your Progress 4 
1) Explain various cognitive influences on an investor.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
2) What is the sunk cost fallacy?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
3) Consider the following statements. Name the bias/effect that an investor
suffers from.
a) An investor believes that others are better informed and thus follows
them ___________________
b) An investor attributes success to his ability and failures to external
factors. __________________________________________
c) An investor sells assets that have made financial gains while holding
on to assets that are losing money.
__________________________________________
d) An investor finds losses to be disproportionately painful as
compared to the pleasure from the gains. ______________________
29.7  LET US SUM UP 
Traditional finance has been based on the concept of “efficient markets” 
which states that the price of an asset or security is ‘right’ as it reflects its 
fundamental value. Financial theory was governed by the idea that investors 
are rational. 
However, over time, it was felt that the traditional theory was not able to 
explain market volatility and unpredictability in the market, market crashes, 
irrational investor Behaviour, stock market bubbles etc. These were explained 
by an alternative approach termed ‘Behavioural Finance’ which focuses on 
cognitive, sociological and psychological influences on the decision-making 
of investors and financial markets. More than contrasting, behavioural 
finance provides an alternative approach to traditional finance to have a better 
understanding of the market and investors. Behavioural finance draws from 
real life that investors are sometimes irrational, and biased and are influenced 


--- Page 104 ---
308 
Financial Stability by various social and psychological factors. It evolved mainly in the 1980s 
when Behavioural finance evolved with an attempt to explain stock market 
bubbles and other market anomalies. 
In this unit, we also discussed about efficient markets hypothesis and its 
anomalies. According to EMH, markets are rational and prices of stocks fully 
reflect all available information and since the information is readily available, 
the price of securities quickly adjusts to the change. There are fundamental, 
technical and Calendar or season and all anomalies. These anomalies reflect 
occurrences that deviate from the predictions of the efficient markets 
hypothesis and undermine its core assumptions. Behavioural Finance also 
explains various market puzzles. The equity premium puzzle refers to the 
empirical fact that stocks have greatly outperformed bonds over the last 
century. Stocks have earned disproportionately higher returns than bonds, 
however, people still buy bonds. Behavioural finance explains this puzzle 
through the concepts of myopic loss aversion and Ambiguity aversion. The 
volatility puzzle reflects the high variability of stock prices having large 
dispersions. Behavioural finance attempts to solve this puzzle through 
various cognitive, social and emotional biases that investors have. This 
puzzle states that stock returns are predictable from price-dividend ratios. 
Behavioural finance is explained in terms of behavioural biases like the 
disposition effect, momentum effect and post-earning announcement drift. 
This unit also discussed about four prominent heuristics that people follow 
while making decisions. Heuristics or ‘rules of thumb’ are imperfect but 
functional shortcuts that help investors simplify complex situations and make 
quick decisions. These heuristics are The anchoring and adjustment heuristic 
(people employ a certain starting point (“the anchor”) and make adjustments 
until they reach an acceptable value over time), the Representativeness 
heuristic (In situations of uncertainty, people evaluate the probability of an 
uncertain event by comparing it to an existing prototype that already exists in 
our minds), Availability Heuristics (assess the probability of occurrence of 
the event based on the ease with which it comes to the mind), Affect 
Heuristic (helps an individual to assign probabilities of occurrence of an 
event based on how a person feel about it).  
We also discussed cognitive influences (Over-Confidence, Cognitive 
Dissonance, Under-reaction and Over-reaction, Disposition effects, 
Diversification bias, Mental Accounting), social influences (Herding, 
Reputation, Beauty contests, Success stories and advice from family, expert 
influence), and emotional influences (Feelings of Regret, Loss aversion, Sunk 
cost fallacy) on an investor. 
29.8  KEY WORDS 
Affect Heuristic  : Affect heuristic helps individuals to make decisions 
based on how a person feels about it. 
Ambiguity aversion: Ambiguity aversion is a preference for known over 
unknown risks by an individual. 
