--- Page 55 ---
259 
Non-performing Assets loans to business ventures that may remotely appear risky for fear of 
aggravating an already high level of NPAs. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) Examine the steps taken by RBI about NPAs.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
2) In what ways NPAs affect the growth of the Indian economy?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
3) What is the relationship between NPAs and Banks’ profitability?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
4) Highlight the impact of rising NPAs on Banks’ capacity to create credit.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
27.5 MEASURES TO TACKLE THE PROBLEM OF 
NPAS 
Until the mid-eighties, management of NPAs was left to the banks and the 
auditors. In 1991, the Narasimhan Committee on the Financial System 
suggested that banks should classify their advances into four broad groups, 
viz. (i) standard assets; (ii) substandard assets; (iii) doubtful assets; and (iv) 
loss assets. Following this, prudential norms relating to income recognition, 
asset classification and provisioning were introduced in 1992 in a phased 
manner.  
In 1998, the Narasimhan Committee on Banking Sector Reforms 
recommended a further tightening of prudential standards to strengthen the 
prevailing norms and bring them on par with evolving international best 
practices. With the introduction of 90-day norms for the classification of 
NPAs in 2001, the NPA guidelines were brought to par with international 
standards (LSS, 2014). 
NPAs can be manageable, but it depends on how many there are and how far 
they are past due. In the short term, most banks can take on a fair amount of 


--- Page 56 ---
260 
Financial Stability onNPAs. However, if the volume of NPAs continues to build over some time, it 
threatens the financial health and future success of the lender. 
Generally, banks keep NPAs in their books in the expectation of recovering 
the money or making provisions for it. The banks or the lenders have options 
to recover their losses, including taking possession of any collateral. If they 
are unable to recover or sell off the loan at a discount to a collection agency 
they write it off entirely as bad debt. 
The decline of NPAs is essential to improve the profitability of banks and 
fulfil the capital adequacy norms as per the Basel Accord (Rajput et al, 2011). 
Central Repository of Information on Large Credits (CRILC) was set up to 
share data for loans over ₹50 million with all banks. The CRILC data 
included the status of each loan; whether it was performing or had become 
NPA or was heading in that direction. This system helped the banks identify 
warning signs and helped segregate the habitual offenders (Palli, 2020). 
To empower the lenders, a new legislation was enacted in the form of the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) in 2016. More than 50 per cent of 
NPA matters are being resolved through the IBC. It laid down separate 
insolvency procedures for companies, individuals and partnership companies 
giving a maximum period of 180 days for resolution extendable by 90 days. 
The NCLT was set up under the IBC, 2016 and at the pre-admission stage 
4452 cases were disposed of which helped creditors obtain dues of ₹2 trillion; 
and various restructured post-liquidation or adjudication (Palli, 2020). 
The National Asset Reconstruction Company (NARCL) along with the India 
Debt Resolution Company (IDRCL) will take over the first set of bad loans 
from banks and try to resolve them. In addition to the statutory provisions 
already available to lenders for recovery and resolution, the other measures 
are:  
i) Recovery of Debts and Bankruptcy Act, 1993,
ii) Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement
of Security Interest Act, 2002, and
iii) Insolvency & Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (IBC).
The government launched ‘ Mission Indradhanush ’ in 2015 to make the 
working of public sector banks more transparent and professional to curb the 
menace of NPAs in future. Banks continue to pursue recovery actions 
initiated in written-off accounts through various recovery mechanisms 
available.  
An important amendment was made in 2021 in the SARFAESI Act, 2002, 
which gives not only the right of ownership to the banks on such properties 
but also provides the right of control and management of such forfeiture-
secured assets. Now, banks and financial institutions may receive guidance 
and assistance from Asset Reconstruction Companies (ARCs) to collect their 
NPAs. 


--- Page 57 ---
261 
Non-performing Assets As a precautionary measure, banks set aside a proportion of their profits to 
meet the risk created by the NPAs. This amount is known as provisioning for 
non-performing assets. As such, banks keep aside a certain amount from their 
profits in a particular quarter for NPAs. This step is taken as a precautionary 
measure in anticipation that assets can turn into losses in the future. Such 
provisions are made by Banks based on different NPA categories. This 
provision also depends upon the type of bank. For instance, Tier-I and Tier-II 
banks have different provisioning norms. By this method, banks can maintain 
a healthy book of accounts by provisioning for bad assets. 
There is a need to ensure that the banking system recognizes financial 
distress early, takes prompt steps to resolve it, and ensures fair recovery for 
lenders and investors so that the banking sector functions without stress. 
27.6 EFFECTIVENESS OF ACTION TAKEN TO 
CURB NPAS 
The state of the banking system is reflected in the banking stability indicator. 
BIS gives an overall assessment of changes in underlying conditions and risk 
factors that have a bearing on the stability of the banking sector. Despite the 
efforts of the RBI and recommendations of Basel committees, the problem of 
an upsurge in NPAs is continuing (Jain, et al, n.d.) 
Banks need to take precautions regarding credit assessments and should take 
measures in pre- and post-sanction of the loans to avoid slippages and 
standard assets of NPAs. The procedures for loans and securities 
hypothecated need to be checked. NPA and their provisions, interest 
calculations, repayment schedule, and audit of bank borrowers need to be 
critically analyzed. There should be a system of periodic review of credit card 
holders’ accounts (Jain, et al, n.d.). Timely action is essential to ensure the 
future growth of the Bank. 
The prudential and provisioning norms and other initiatives taken by the 
regulatory bodies have pressurized banks to improve their performance and 
consequently resulted in the trim down of NPAs as well as improvement in 
the financial health of the Indian banking system. The government in August 
2019, announced a merger of 10 public sector banks into 4 banks reducing 
the public sector banks to 12 from 27. This will help improve the profitability 
of public sector banks and consequently reduce total gross NPAs. 
Remarkably, rigorous methods have been and shall continue to be adopted to 
address the situation surrounding NPAs. Instituting the use of third-party data 
sources in PSBs for comprehensive due diligence across data sources at the 
sanction stage itself, to mitigate risk on account of misrepresentation and 
fraud. Despite, RBI’s efforts to control NPAs, there is room for further action 
in the following way (Palli, 2020): 
i) Records of borrowers should be available to banks to form an opinion
and conduct financial background checks of prospective borrowers.


--- Page 58 ---
262 
Financial Stability onii) The credit team of banks should also undergo periodic training to update
their skills and industry benchmarks along with credit evaluation sheets,
which should be upgraded regularly.
iii) Data analytics can also be a significant tool to conduct effective periodic
reviews and audits.
The banks are supposed to focus their actions on reducing their NPAs and 
operating costs to improve their profitability (Das & Uppal, 2021). The banks 
should follow proper procedures for the dispatch of loans. There is a need to 
take time-oriented action to hinder the evolution of NPAs in India. 
27.7 RECENT POLICY MEASURES TOWARDS 
NPAS 
The issue of NPAs is of considerable significance for the regulators as the 
intensification of the same has always been the precursor to the banking crisis 
and banking failures worldwide. One must recognize the centrality of NPAs 
in ensuring the stability of scheduled commercial banks. The proactive 
approach to make provisions on the probable losses even for the standard 
assets is a globally accepted prudent norm set by the IFRS 9 standard. The 
RBI also highlighted the importance of keeping the expected loss-based 
forward-looking provisions for the safety of commercial banks in India. 
Tracking the significant increase in credit risk is a novel addition to the new 
accounting norm since it will enable the banks to heighten their diligence to 
protect themselves from the risks of bad loans. The ECL methodology takes 
into account the historical probability of default trends as well as current and 
future economic scenarios and predictions. Thus, it significantly changes 
banks’ incentives by inclining them to manage and dispose of bad loans 
much more actively than the existing process. The ECL method is expected 
to bring prudence in lending since banks will be able to better monitor their 
loan slippage and track rating movements (Bandyopadhyay, 2023). 
Customising systemic controls to domestic banking, the RBI rightly urged 
banks to make extra provisions against exposure to the top 20 business 
houses that face higher external risks. The nudge by the RBI is more towards 
building a buffer, banks can decide on how much they would want to set 
aside if they have exposure to any of the 20 conglomerates. The prudential 
provisioning will reflect as part of the provisioning buffer held by banks. 
(The Hindu Business Line, March 27, 2023). 
The crux of the recent Supreme Court ruling is that it affirms the right of a 
borrower to be given a fair hearing before the NPA account is declared as 
fraud. On March 27, 2023, the Supreme Court in the case State Bank of India 
vs Rajesh Agarwal ruled that the principles of natural justice must be applied 
to borrowers, who should be given a hearing before banks classify loan 
accounts as fraudulent. The court also said the decision to classify a loan as 
fraudulent should be made by a reasoned order, given the potentially serious 


--- Page 59 ---
263 
Non-performing Assets civil consequences. The SC ruling may lead to fewer cases of fraud being 
registered but could also lead to more accountability and punishment in such 
cases. Given the situation, even a small improvement on this front would be a 
huge step (Mint, March 31, 2023). 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) Give an outline of measures taken by banks to curb the growth of NPAs.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
2) What are the suggestions made by the Narasimhan Committee in 1998?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
3) Analyse the effectiveness of measures for tackling the problem of NPAs.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
4) Why has RBI urged banks to make extra provisions against mismatch
between assets and liabilities?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
5) In what way Central Repository of Information on Large Credits
(CRILC) will help in reducing NPAs?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
27.8  LET US SUM UP 
NPAs are loans or advances made by a financial institution, on which both 
principal and interest are unpaid for a specified period. NPAs are those loans 
that have ceased to generate income for the bank. They are recorded on a 
bank’s balance sheet after a prolonged period of non-payment by the 
borrower. NPAs can be classified as substandard assets, doubtful assets, or 
loss assets, depending on the length of time overdue and the probability of 
repayment. The increase in non-performing advances hurts the rate of profit 


--- Page 60 ---
264 
Financial Stability onSeveral factors like prevailing macroeconomic conditions, sectoral issues, 
global business environment, delayed recognition of stress by banks, 
aggressive lending during upturns, improper risk pricing and poor credit 
underwriting were attributed towards NPA build-up. One of the primary 
reasons for stressed assets can be attributed to lethargic due diligence and an 
ineffective sanctioning process. A large proportion of NPAs arose because of 
exogenous shock. Most of the NPAs arose due to defaults by private sector 
non-financial firms. 
The government and RBI regularly issue guidelines and have taken several 
initiatives aimed at the resolution of long-standing stressed assets on the 
books of banks as well as timely identification and recognition of stress 
immediately upon default and taking corrective action for mitigation of the 
same. For the borrower, if the asset is non-performing and does not pay the 
interest, it can hurt their creditworthiness and growth. Also, it will hamper 
their ability to obtain a loan in future. 
Banks faced a significant challenge of rising NPAs in 2011 which peaked at 
11.18 per cent in the fiscal year 2018. Even the government is allowing the 
banks to make provision for NPAs. It is important that both the borrower and 
lender must be aware of the NPAs. RBI has introduced stringent policy 
norms and banks have to make their NPA numbers public from time to time.  
27.9  KEY WORDS 
Bank for International  : 
Settlements (BIS) 
It is an international financial institution owned 
by central banks that “fosters international 
monetary and financial cooperation and serves as 
a bank for central banks.” 
ECL approach  :  This approach requires the estimation of credit 
losses through the life of a financial instrument 
and subsequently the present value of such credit 
losses, as on the reporting date.  
Fraud  : This is indicative of deceitful acts. Bank fraud is 
a purposeful act of omission or conduct by any 
person in the course of a banking transaction or 
the bank’s books of accounts. Fraud denotes a 
false statement made knowingly. 
IFRS 9 standard  :
 IFRS 9 specifies how an entity should classify 
and measure financial assets, financial liabilities, 
and some contracts to buy or sell non-financial 
items. 
Twin Balance Sheet      : 
(TBS) problem 
This deals with two balance sheet problems. One 
with Indian companies and the other with Indian 
Banks. Thus, TBS is a two-fold problem for the 
Indian economy which deals with overleveraged 


--- Page 61 ---
265 
Non-performing Assets companies and bad-loan-encumbered banks. 
This can be explained by the fact that the 
corporations over-expand during a boom, 
leaving them with obligations that they can’t 
repay. So, they default on their debts, leaving 
bank balance sheets impaired, as well. This 
combination then proves devastating for growth. 
This has been an issue lingering for decades in 
the Indian economy, albeit in different forms and 
structural names. 
Willful defaulter  :  According to RBI, a willful defaulter is any unit 
which has defaulted in repaying the lender. Even 
when it could be repaid. Willful default occurs 
when a debtor willfully defaults on the 
repayment of a loan. 
Zombie lending  :  Zombie lending is the extension of new credit or 
prolonging of existing loans to low-productivity 
firms. While such policies may stabilise the 
economy in the short run, they risk transforming 
transitory shocks into phases of delayed recovery 
and permanent productivity and output losses. It 
refers to extending credit to entities that cannot 
repay. 
27.10  SOME USEFUL BOOKS AND REFERENCES 
Agarwala, Varuna & Agarwala, Nidhi (2019); A critical review of non-
performing assets in the Indian banking industry; Rajagiri Management 
Journal Vol. 13 (2) PP. 12-23 
https://www.emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1108/RAMJ-08-2019-
0010/full/html 
Bandyopadhyay, Arindam (2023, March 11); Predicting the Probability of 
Default for Banks’ Expected Credit Loss Provisions; Economic and Political 
Weekly; Vol. LVIII (10) pp. 15-19 
Chandrasekhar, C.P. (2022, January 15); Non-Performing Assets: The 
renewed fear of bad debt; Economic and Political Weekly; Vol 57 (3) 
https://www.epw.in/tags/non-performing-assets 
Das, Santosh Kumar & Uppal, Khushboo (2021); NPAs and  
Profitability in Indian banks: an empirical analysis; Future Business Journal, 
Vol. 7(1), pp.3-9 
https://fbj.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s43093-021-00096-3 


--- Page 62 ---
266 
Financial Stability onGaur, Dolly & Mohapatra, Dipti Ranjan (2020, April 17); Non-performing 
Assets and Profitability: Case of Indian Banking Sector; The Journal of 
Business Perspective, Vol. 25(2) 
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0972262920914106?journalCo
de=visa 
Hafsal, K; Suvvari, Anandarao & Durai, SRS (2020, July 16); 
The efficiency of Indian banks with non-performing assets: evidence from 
two-stage network DEA; Future Business Journal, Vol. 6, Article No. 26 
https://fbj.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s43093-020-00030-z 
Jain, Esha, Lamba, Jonika & Soni, Nitika (n.d.) A Comparative Examination 
Of Non-Performing Asset Management Of Banks In India; School of 
Management & Liberal Studies, The NorthCap University, Haryana, India 
https://ejournal.lucp.net/index.php/ijrtbt/article/view/1417/1585 
Jaiswar, Pooja Sitaram (2022, December 29); Banks gross NPA drops to a 7-
year low at 5%, net NPA at a decade low: RBI's FSR, The Mint. 
https://www.livemint.com/news/india/banks-gross-npa-drops-to-7-year-low-
at-5-net-npa-at-a-decade-low-rbi-s-fsr-11672318983978.html 
Naveen J. (2022, March 11); What are Non-Performing Assets?; The 
Corporate Review 
https://thecorporatereview.com/what-are-non-performing-assets-npa/ 
Palli, Nikhil (2020); Non-performing Assets in India: An Analysis over the 
years, AsianBanking& Finance. 
https://asianbankingandfinance.net/lending-credit/commentary/non-
performing-assets-in-india-analysis-over-years 
Rajput, Namita; Arora, Anu Priya & Kaur, Baljeet (2011); Non-performing 
assets in Indian public sector banks: an analytical study; Business 
Perspectives – Banks and Bank Systems, Vol 6(4) pp. 84-89 
https://www.businessperspectives.org/images/pdf/applications/publishing/te
mplates/article/assets/4383/BBS_en_2011_04_Rajput.pdf 
Rao, K. Srinivasa (2023, March 30); RBI’s timely move to ring-fence banks; The 
Hindu Business Line. 
https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/money-and-banking/rbi-asks-banks-
to-make-extra-provisioning-on-top-20-business-houses/article66664724.ece 
Selvarajan, B. & Vadivalagan, G. (2013); A Study on Management of Non-
Performing Assets in Priority Sector reference to Indian Bank and Public 


--- Page 63 ---
267 
Non-performing Assets Sector Banks (PSBs); Global Journal of Management and Business Research 
Volume 13(1)  
https://globaljournals.org/GJMBR_Volume13/10-A-Study-on-Management-
of-Non.pdf 
Sikdar, A. (2020, December 22). NPAs and its effects on banks' profitability. 
Times of India . https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/blogs/economic-
update/npas-and-its-effects-on-banks-profitability/ 
Singh, Aakriti & Arora, Amber (n.d.): Non-performing assets in India: A 
critical analysis of public and private sector banks; Journal of Multi-
disciplinary Legal Research, Vol. 2(2). 
https://jmdlr.in/static/media/Non-
Performing%20Assets%20in%20India%20A%20Critical%20Analysis%20of
%20Public%20and%20Private%20Sector%20Banks%20-
%20Aakriti%20Singh%20&%20Amber%20Arora.eee3970f.pdf 
27.11 ANSWERS/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) Considering the nature of NPAs, the RBI has categorized them into three
broad categories depending on the period of default. These categories are
Sub-Standard Asset, Doubtful Asset, and Loss Asset.
2) NPAs are recorded on a bank’s balance sheet only after a prolonged
period of non-repayment by the borrower. When the banks accept that
the loan will never be repaid, they record a loss on their balance sheet.
The entire amount of the loan must be written off completely.
3) Refer to Sub-section 27.2.2
4) Under this system, the banks monitor and track the portfolios of their
customers regularly.  The EWS helps the banks to check the asset quality
of the borrowers (corporate firms). The EWS (software) helps the banks
to identify signs of distress which is not possible to check manually.
5) The twin balance sheet problem refers to a situation where the borrower
(corporate sector) is under stress due to high debt, and the lender (banks)
is under stress due to non-repayment of loans (NPAs). The balance
sheets of both the borrower and the lender have problems.
Check Your Progress 2 
1) Defaults are to be recognized within 30 days, The Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code of 2016 plays an important role in the recovery of
assets of those creditors whose case has been filed with the National
Company Law Tribunal (NCLT). prudential asset-liability management


--- Page 64 ---
268 
Financial Stability onframework for domestic banks and curbs on total leverage to the 
systematic plugging of regulatory arbitrage between banks and other 
financial entities. 
2) A strong banking sector is important for the Indian economy. The failure
of the banking system may hurt other sectors. Refer to Section 27.6 for
the detailed answer.
3) NPAs hurt the rate of profit of the Indian banks. NPAs negatively affect
banks’ ability to generate income and profitability. It on the one hand
reduces their interest earning and, on the other hand, also affects their
future deposits and increases their operating cost.
4) Higher NPAs influence the price of loans and interest rates, which in turn
affects the confidence of investors, lenders, and depositors equally.
While higher interest rates will directly impact the investors in need of
loans for the creation of infrastructural and industrial projects, they also
cause poor recovery of funds, which will affect the credit creation and
revenue stream of the banks.
Check Your Progress 3 
1) Refer to Section 27.9
2) In 1998, the Narasimhan Committee on Banking Sector Reforms
recommended a further tightening of prudential standards to strengthen
the prevailing norms and bring them on par with evolving international
best practices. With the introduction of 90-day norms for the
classification of NPAs in 2001, the NPA guidelines were brought to par
with international standards.
3) NPAs can be manageable, but it depends on how many there are and
how far they are past due. In the short term, most banks can take on a fair
amount of NPAs. However, if the volume of NPAs continues to build
over some time, it threatens the financial health and future success of the
lender. Also, refer to section 27.8.
4) The nudge by the RBI is more towards building a buffer, banks can
decide on how much they would want to set aside if they have exposure
to any of the 20 conglomerates.
5) CRILC) was set up to share data for loans over ₹50 million with all
banks. The CRILC data included the status of each loan; whether it was
performing or had become NPA or was heading in that direction. This
system helped the banks identify warning signs and helped segregate the
habitual offenders.
27.12  TERMINAL EXERCISES 
1) Do you agree that there is a declining trend in the stock of NPAs? Give
reasons in support of your answer.


--- Page 65 ---
269 
Non-performing Assets 2) “NPAs in the banking sector are growing and are found to be at the
centre of the economic problem of the banks in India”. Explain this
statement and discuss the problem created by growing NPAs.
3) How do NPAs reflect the asset quality, credit risk and efficiency in the
allocation of resources to productive sectors? Explain the impact of
NPAs on the stability of the banking system in India.
4) Why does the high level of NPAs cause worry to any financial
institution? What measures have been taken to regulate the problem of
NPAs?
5) “Most of the NPAs originated during the mid-2000s, during the period of
high economic growth and positive business outlook. This led to an easy
flow of credit”. Give reasons for this rise in NPAs.
6) Do you agree that there is a need to have a proper set of policy measures
for recognizing NPAs early? What prompt steps to resolve and ensure
fair recovery for lenders would you recommend?
