--- Page 66 ---
270 
Financial Stability UNIT 28  FOREIGN EXCHANGE STABILITY 
AND RELATED ISSUES 
Structure 
28.0  Objectives  
28.1  Concept of Foreign Exchange Stability 
28.2  Basic Concepts  
28.2.1  Meaning of Exchange Rate  
28.2.2  Exchange Rate Systems  
28.2.3  Factors Affecting Demand for the Foreign Exchange 
28.2.4  Factors Affecting the Supply of Foreign Exchange  
28.3  Issues in Foreign Exchange Stability   
28.4  Measures to Maintain Foreign Exchange Stability  
28.5  Let Us Sum Up  
28.6  Key Words 
28.7  Some Useful Books 
28.8 Answers / Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
28.0  OBJECTIVES 
After going through this unit, learners will be able to: 
 explain the concept of foreign exchange stability;
 identify the key issues related to foreign exchange stability; and
 suggest measures to achieve foreign exchange stability.
28.1  CONCEPT OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE 
STABILITY 
Foreign exchange stability refers to the consistency and predictability of 
exchange rates between different currencies. Alternatively, foreign exchange 
stability, also known as exchange rate stability, refers to a situation in which 
the currency of an economy maintains a relatively consistent or predictable 
value over other foreign currencies over some time. Exchange rate stability is 
a desirable goal for many countries and has several important implications for 
their economies and international trade. Foreign exchange stability is a key 
concern for governments, businesses, and investors, as it affects the cost of 
imports and exports, the competitiveness of industries, and the overall 
economic health of a country. Maintaining a stable exchange rate is often a 
delicate balancing act, requiring careful policy choices and international 
cooperation to mitigate risks and support economic growth.     


--- Page 67 ---
271 
Foreign Exchange 
Stability and 
Related Issues 
28.2 BASIC CONCEPTS 
Let us discuss certain basic concepts related to exchange rate stability. 
28.2.1  Meaning of Exchange Rate 
Many times, we hear through the mass media such as Zee Business, 
Bloomberg TV, CNN, CNBC, BBC or print media such as The Times of 
India, Business Line, etc. that the US dollar has appreciated against the 
Indian rupee or Indian rupee has become stronger against the US dollar, 
Sterling Pound, Japanese Yen, etc. What does it mean? The media frequently 
discusses the ups and downs in exchange rates. An exchange rate means the 
price of the currency of a country like the Indian rupee in terms of the 
currency of another country like the US dollar. So, when the media report 
that the exchange rate between India and the US is ₹ 83.17/$1, then it means 
that one US dollar is equal to ₹ 83.17. In other words, it means that one US 
dollar can buy 83.17 Indian rupees. As the dollar appreciates against the 
Indian rupee, then one dollar can buy more Indian rupees or as the dollar 
depreciates against the Indian rupee, then one dollar can buy less Indian 
rupees. Media may report an exchange rate in direct and indirect quotes the 
meaning of which are given below.  
A direct quote measures how many units of domestic currency can be 
bought by one unit of a foreign currency while an Indirect quote measures 
how many units of foreign currency can be bought by one unit of domestic 
currency. Thus, the direct quote between the Indian rupee (domestic 
currency) and the US dollar (foreign currency) can be expressed as follows:  
$1 = ₹ 83.17 
 The indirect quote between the Indian rupee (domestic currency) and the US 
dollar (foreign currency) can be expressed as follows:  
₹ 1= $ 0.0120 
28.2.2  Exchange Rate Systems 
a) Fixed Exchange Rate : Under this regime, a country’s currency is
pegged to another currency or a fixed value like gold. This provides
stability but can be challenging to maintain in the long run. Under this
system, the exchange rate is determined by the central bank (e.g., RBI in
India). The exchange rate so fixed is also called the official exchange
rate. The central bank ensures that the exchange rate should not go
beyond or fall below the exchange rate fixed. To understand how the
fixed exchange rate system works, let us examine Fig. 28.1. We assume
that the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) desires to keep the exchange rate
between the US dollar ($) and Indian rupee (₹) fixed at ₹ 50/$. But the
equilibrium exchange rate in the foreign exchange market the exchange
rate is ₹ 60/$ as determined by the intersection of demand curve D and


--- Page 68 ---
272 
Financial Stability supply curve S1 at point E1, then to bring the exchange rate to the desired 
level of ₹ 50/$, the RBI will have to sell the dollars equal to Q 1Q2 so that 
the supply can increase from S 1 to S 2 intersecting demand curve D at 
point E 2. Thus, we have a new equilibrium point E 2 at which the 
exchange rate reaches to the desired level of ₹ 50/$. Now the question is 
how does the central bank sell Q 1Q2 dollars? The answer is the 
arbitration process. In the arbitrage process, there is a person, known as 
an arbitrageur, who can buy one dollar from the RBI by paying ₹ 50 and 
then sell the same dollar in the foreign exchange market for ₹ 60 to earn 
a profit of ₹ 10 per dollar. Thus, an arbitrager can earn a total profit of ₹ 
10 multiplied by Q 1Q2. One point is also relevant here i.e., on selling 
Q1Q2 dollars the foreign exchange reserves held by RBI fall. Thus, when 
a currency (US dollar in the present case) is overvalued, then foreign 
exchange reserves fall if a fixed exchange rate system is adopted. If the 
equilibrium exchange rate in the foreign exchange market falls below the 
desired level, then the RBI can buy the required amount of dollars to 
bring it above. It will increase the foreign exchange reserves.  
 
 Fig. 28.1: Fixed Exchange Rate System 
b) Floating Exchange Rate : In this regime, the exchange rate is
determined by market forces, such as supply and demand. This allows
for flexibility but can lead to volatility. Under this system, the exchange
rate is determined based on the demand and supply of the foreign
currency concerned. Alternatively, market forces of demand and supply
for the foreign currency decide the equilibrium exchange rate. To
understand this, consider the US dollar as a foreign currency against the
Indian rupee, then the exchange rate between the US and India is
determined by the demand for and supply of the US dollar. When the
demand for the US dollar is equal to its supply, the corresponding
exchange rate is known as the equilibrium exchange rate. It is evident
that shifts in supply and demand affect the exchange rate and cause it to
rise or fall. Let us understand the system through Fig. 28.2. In Fig. 28.2,
D1 denotes the demand for the US dollar and S 1 does the supply of the
same. Both the curves are intersecting at the point E 1. Therefore, point
D 
E1 
E2 
 0        Q 1                         Q2        $ (USD) 
S2 
S1 
₹ 60 / $ 
₹ 50 / $ 
Exchange Rate 
₹/$ 


--- Page 69 ---
273 
Foreign Exchange 
Stability and 
Related Issues 
D1 
S1 
E1 
S2 
E2 𝑒1 
Exchange Rate 
 0  Q1    Q2   Q3  $ (USD) 
D2 
𝑒2 
𝑒3 
E3 
E1 is the equilibrium point where the exchange rate is e 1 called the 
equilibrium exchange rate. Now, suppose that the supply of the US 
dollar increases causing the supply curve to shift S 2. S2 intersects D1 at 
E2. Thus, the new equilibrium exchange rate is e 2. Thus, we conclude 
that an increase in supply with constant demand leads fall in the 
exchange rate. Opposite will happen when the supply falls with 
constant demand. Now suppose that due to some reason, the demand 
for the US dollars increases to D 2 with constant supply at S 1. As a 
result, a new equilibrium exchange rate e 3 is obtained. Therefore, an 
increase in demand with constant supply leads increase in the exchange 
rate. Opposite will happen if the demand falls with constant supply. 
However, demand and supply both can change simultaneously, 
accordingly exchange rate too fluctuates.  
 
Fig. 28.2: Floating Exchange Rate System 
28.2.3  Factors Affecting Demand for Foreign Exchange 
Some of the factors that affect demand for foreign exchange are discussed as 
follows:   
1) To pay import bills
To import goods and services from abroad our country needs foreign
currency. So, if an Indian trader wants to import cars from the US, then
he will demand US dollars to pay for the cars. Similarly, if Air India
wants to buy some new airbuses from the UK, then it will demand
Sterling Pound to pay for the air buses. Thus, imports create demand for
foreign currencies.
2) To repay international loans
Indian corporations or governments demand foreign currency to repay
the loans taken from foreign countries. Thus, repayment of international
loans creates demand for foreign exchange.


--- Page 70 ---
274 
Financial Stability 3) Arbitrage purpose
Suppose, there are two foreign exchange markets X and Y in which the
exchange rates between the Indian rupee and the US dollar are ₹ 50 per
dollar and ₹ 55 per dollar respectively. Then, a person who wants to gain
from these exchange rate differences will buy the US dollars from X and
sell the same in Y and will earn ₹ 5 per dollar as profit. This is known as
the arbitrage process. This is obvious that the demand for the US dollar
increases in market X.
4) Speculation
Speculation means the opportunity for profit due to the difference
between the prices of a good/share/currency etc. at two points in time.
So, if we expect that the US dollar will appreciate in future, it means the
US dollar is relatively cheaper now, therefore, one may buy or demand
US dollars today and sell the same in future at a higher price can earn a
profit.
5) To give gifts, and grants to foreign countries
Indian residents or governments may decide to give gifts, grants etc. for
some purposes. To do so they will demand foreign currency. For
example, the Indian government may decide to gift 10 million US
dollars; the government will demand 10 million US dollars.
6) Investment in foreign countries
Indian investors may decide to invest in foreign countries. For example,
if TATA group decides to take over Jaguar (a car company in Great
Britain),  the latter will demand Sterling Pound for payment of the
consideration. Similarly, if a resident of India wants to buy equity shares
of a US company, then (s)he will demand US dollars to do so.
7) To visit foreign countries
Indian residents will demand Sterling Pound, US dollars, Australian
dollars, Canadian dollars etc. if they want to visit Great Britain, the US,
Australia, and Canada respectively. The purpose of the visit may be
tourism, higher study, etc.
8) To remit the money
Foreigners may be working in India and they will earn in Indian
currency. To remit these earnings to their parents, spouses, relatives etc.
in their home countries, they will demand foreign currencies.
28.2.4  Factors Affecting Supply of Foreign Exchange 
1) Receipts of exports
Exports of goods and services are one the major sources of foreign
exchange supply. So, if an Indian car company exports some cars to the
US dollars will move to India.


--- Page 71 ---
275 
Foreign Exchange 
Stability and 
Related Issues 
2) Repayment of international loans
Indian corporations or governments might have decided to give loans to
other countries, then their repayments will bring foreign exchange.
3) Arbitrage purpose
Suppose, there are two foreign exchange markets X and Y in which the
exchange rates between the Indian rupee and the US dollar are ₹ 50 per
dollar and ₹ 55 per dollar respectively. Then, a person who wants to gain
from these exchange rate differences will buy the US dollars from X and
sell the same in Y and will earn ₹ 5 per dollar as profit. This is known as
the arbitrage process. It is obvious that the supply of dollars increases in
market Y.
4) Speculation
Speculation means the opportunity for profit due to the difference
between the prices of goods/ stocks/ currency, etc. at two points in time.
So, if we expect that the US Dollar will depreciate in future, it means the
US Dollar is relatively expensive now, therefore, one may sell US
Dollars today to escape from future loss.
5) Gifts and grants from foreign countries
Foreign residents or governments may decide to give gifts, grants etc. to
India, for some purposes. As a result, foreign exchange will move to
India.
6) Investments from foreign countries
Foreign investment in a domestic company can lead to an increase in the
supply of foreign exchange in several ways. Foreign exchange refers to
the currency of a foreign country, and it is used to facilitate international
trade and investment. When foreign investors invest in a domestic
company, they often need to acquire the domestic currency to make their
investment.
7) Visiting the home country (i.e., India, in our Case)
Foreign residents or NRIs may decide to visit India for tourism, higher
study, or other purposes. Therefore, they will need Indian currency to
pay in India. Hence, they will exchange the currencies against the Indian
rupees. In this way, the foreign exchange reserves of India will increase.
8) Foreign remittances
Indian residents or Indian corporations may be working or operating
outside India and they will earn in foreign currencies. To remit these
earnings to their parents, spouses, relatives etc. in India, they will


--- Page 72 ---
276 
Financial Stability demand Indian currency in exchange for the foreign currencies available 
to them.  
Check Your Progress 1 
1) What is the need for foreign exchange stability in a country?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………….... 
2) Briefly describe various factors affecting the Supply of Foreign
Exchange.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………….... 
3) Compare fixed exchange rate system with floating exchange rate system.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………….... 
28.3  ISSUES IN FOREIGN EXCHANGE 
STABILITY 
Here are some key aspects and related issues in foreign exchange stability: 
1) Managed or Dirty Floating
A “managed float,” also referred to as a “dirty float,” is a regime for
exchange rates where the exchange rate is neither fully set nor
completely free. Instead, central bank intervention maintains the
currency’s value within a range relative to another currency or a basket
of currencies. Some countries are accused of manipulating their
exchange rates to gain an unfair trade advantage. This can lead to
international tensions and trade disputes. In today’s global economy,
currency exchange rates play a crucial role in shaping a country’s
economic performance. Nearly all economies actively manage their
currencies, with central banks or governments frequently intervening to
control their values. According to data from the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) in 2014 1, 82 countries and regions, representing 43 per cent
of economies, employed a managed float system, making it the most
prevalent exchange rate regime.
1https://asia.nikkei.com/Markets/Currencies/IMF-finds-more-countries-adopting-managed-
floating-exchange-rate-system 


--- Page 73 ---
277 
Foreign Exchange 
Stability and 
Related Issues 
2) Exchange Rate Policy
The exchange rate policy of an economy can be influenced by its
economic goals. For example, a country may pursue a strong currency
policy to control inflation or a weak currency policy to boost exports. For
example,
……in the 1990s, India’s economy was experiencing hardship. 39% 
of the money the government was collecting at the time went toward 
paying interest. After cutting its fiscal deficit to 7.8% of GDP, India 
faced the risk of being branded a defaulter on the global stage. A 
devaluation of the Indian rupee was necessary in light of this 
problem. The process of devaluation involves a country lowering the 
value of its currency on the global market while maintaining its 
intrinsic value. Similar measures were taken by India to increase the 
cost of its imports and decrease the price of its exports.  
Source: https://www.bookmyforex.com/blog/1-usd-inr-1947-till-now/ 
3) Parallel Foreign Exchange Systems
Parallel foreign exchange systems are found in many developing
countries, where they combine a market-driven exchange rate that
primarily applies to financial transactions, and sometimes a portion of
trade transactions, alongside one or more fixed exchange rates. These
arrangements are often implemented in response to a balance of
payments crisis. In one scenario, governments establish a legal parallel
or dual foreign exchange market for financial transactions. This move is
aimed at mitigating the immediate impact of a depreciation in the
exchange rate on domestic prices while retaining some level of control
over capital outflows and international reserves. In another scenario,
strict foreign exchange controls limit access to official markets, leading
to the emergence of an illicit parallel market. As the authorities respond
to a worsening balance of payments situation by tightening and
expanding exchange controls, the illicit market gains prominence. Strong
limitations that have led to external imbalances and the growth of a
substantial parallel market where the currency currently trades at nearly a
60 per cent premium characterize Burundi’s foreign exchange market.
One of the authorities’ main short-term goals going ahead is to stabilize
the exchange rate and lessen these distortions 2. Informal trade (i.e.,
parallel foreign exchange market) in South Asia was 50 per cent of
formal trade between 1993 and 20053.
2www.elibrary.imf.org 
3 https://blogs.worldbank.org/endpovertyinsouthasia/capital-controls-and-parallel-
exchange-rates-south-asia 


--- Page 74 ---
278 
Financial Stability 4) Political Instability
Political stability affects foreign exchange rates significantly and raises
demand for a currency. Switzerland, for example, is renowned for its
political stability, adherence to neutrality, and avoidance of international
confrontations. Because of this, the Swiss franc is seen as a haven in
foreign exchange trading and is frequently used to offset currency risk.
Conversely, political unrest, coops, and protests destabilize the economy
and devalue the local currency. As a result, there is less demand for and
more risk associated with keeping the relevant domestic currency.
5) Trade Balances
Consider the distribution of national output as
Y = C ୢ + Iୢ + Gୢ + X 
Where,  
Y = National output 
Cୢ = Consumption of domestically made goods and services 
Iୢ = Investment in domestically made goods and services 
Gୢ = Government expenditure on domestically made goods and services 
X = Exports of domestically made goods and services  
We know that in the world of globalization or the case of an open 
economy, people do not consume only domestically produced services, 
investment is not restricted to domestic goods and services only and 
similarly, government purchases are not limited to domestic goods and 
services only. Therefore, we can say that  
C = C ୢ + C୊  
I = I ୢ + I୊  
G = G ୢ + G୊  
where the super-script F on C, I and G show the consumption of, 
investment in and government expenditure on foreign goods and services 
respectively.  
Now, the national income identity can be re-written as follows: 
Y = C − C ୊ + I − I୊ + G − G୊ + X 
Y = C + I + G + X − C ୊ − I୊ − G୊  
Y = C + I + G + X − (C ୊ + I୊ + G୊ ) 


--- Page 75 ---
279 
Foreign Exchange 
Stability and 
Related Issues 
Since C୊ + I୊ + G୊  means the total imports denoted by IM and therefore 
Y = C + I + G + X − IM 
The difference X – IM is called net exports (NX) and many times called 
trade balance and therefore national income accounts identity in an open 
economy becomes  
Y = C + I + G + NX  
NX = Y − (C + I + G)  
Thus, 
Net exports = National output − Domestic spending  
Now, Consider the national income account identity again  
Y = C + I + G + NX  
Y − C − G = I + NX  
The left-hand side of the equation is called national saving (S) and 
therefore 
S = I + NX 
S − I = NX 
Thus, the net exports are equal to the excess of savings over investments. 
The difference between savings and investment is called net capital 
outflow (or net foreign investment) because the difference shows the 
flow capital i.e., if S is greater than I, then the excess amount is invested 
in the rest of the world which causes the outflow of the capital from the 
domestic land and if S is less than I, then the shortage is met from the 
rest of the world which causes inflow of the capital. Thus, positive NX 
means net capital outflow which means there is trade surplus and 
negative NX means net capital inflow which means trade deficit. In this 
way, net exports are financed by the net capital outflow. Now, we 
consider a small open economy in case of which this is assumed that the 
domestic interest denoted by r* is determined by the world interest rate 
denoted by r. Thus,  
r* = r 
We know that the investment is a function of interest rate and therefore 
we have  
I = I(r) 
Further, since, S depends upon Y, C and G and Y is supposed to be 
constant because it is determined by the factors of production, G is 
