--- Page 33 ---
237 
Financial Stability and 
Related Issues 
f) Lack of robust legal and regulatory framework: The legal and
regulatory framework have an impact on the financial stability of the
various financial institutions. Lack of a robust legal and regulatory
framework can lead to high risk in the financial system, and impose a
threat on the financial stability as it fails to mitigate the impact of any
kind of risk like financial crisis risk, global risk, liquidity risk etc.
g) Global factors:  Global factors like international trade relations and
agreements, global economic trends, geopolitical events, etc. can
significantly impact the financial stability of the financial system of a
country. For instance, a global recession or a trade war between major
economies can impact the financial stability of a country, like the war
between Russia and Ukraine has an impact on the financial stability of
the respective countries and their major trading partners.
We can conclude that financial stability is affected by many factors and if a 
country has a robust framework for regulating the financial system the impact 
of the above discussed factors may be reduced to a greater extent. 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) Define Financial Stability.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
2) Bring out the factors that affect the financial stability of an economy.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
3) Give an example of any global financial crisis that has an impact on the
financial stability of India.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
26.4  ISSUES IN FINANCIAL STABILITY 
There could be several issues that can arise in maintaining financial stability. 
These issues are: 


--- Page 34 ---
238 
Financial Stability inancial Stability anda) Systemic risk:  Systemic risk refers to the risk that imposes a barrier in
the efficient financial system that can have a severe impact on the entire
economy of a country. There can be various sources of systemic risk like
interconnections and interdependence between the financial institutions
and markets, and the contagion effects that begin from the failure of one
institution and engulf the entire institutions or markets resulting in
widespread financial crisis. Systemic risk impacts financial stability in
many ways as it can lead to the collapse of financial institutions and
markets, can also result in a loss of confidence in the financial system
and can also lead to a contagion effect.
b) Shadow banking : Shadow banking refers to a system where the
provision of credit and related financial services are done by entities that
are not regulated, unlike banks. In the absence of a robust regulatory
framework, such entities engage themselves in risky lending practices
which increases the risk of default and can lead to systemic risk. There
are various risks associated with shadow banking like it may build up
systemic risk as it is not completely regulated and therefore it lacks
accountability and may create difficulties in the financial system.
Shadow banking can also lead to financial instability in the absence of
any review mechanism.
c) Cyber-security: Technology offers both benefits and limitations to any
system as is the case with the financial system. Cyber-security threats
like cyber attacks can pose a significant risk to the financial stability of
any economy. Financial institutions like banks, non-banking financial
institutions, investment firms, and payment systems, are the prime target
for cybercriminals. Cyber-security threats can adversely impact financial
stability in various ways like disrupting the flow of funds between
financial institutions, through illegal access of sensitive financial
information and using such information to engage in fraudulent activities
like money laundering, unauthorized transactions etc. All this ultimately
results in losing the confidence of the public in the financial system
which can further result in a financial crisis. Therefore, it becomes very
important to have a robust system of cyber-laws to deal with such kinds
of cyber-attacks.
d) International spill-ins and spill-outs: The international interconnections
of financial markets can lead to international spillovers. Financial
instability in one country has an impact on the other country which
means that any financial disruption or financial shocks of one country
can easily and quickly spread and affect the financial stability of the
other country. All this may may result in a loss of confidence in financial
markets and institutions, currency depreciation, asset price volatility etc.
This could also result in increasing the threat of systemic risks besides
exposing the economy to other vulnerabilities.


--- Page 35 ---
239 
Financial Stability and 
Related Issues 
e) Too-big-to-fail: This means that some financial institutions are so large
that their failure could have a catastrophic impact on the economy. This
perception of too-big-to-fail can result in moral hazard as these financial
institutions are guaranteed by the government or RBI and therefore, they
take excessive risks since they know that they will not be allowed to fail.
Such institutions also erode the confidence of the general public as the
public believes that these institutions are above the law and that their
money (taxes) is being used to protect these institutions against failure.
Financial stability can only be maintained through a comprehensive and 
proactive approach of various parties like policymakers, regulators, and 
market participants. These participants must take the above issues in mind 
while planning for financial stability. 
26.5  CHALLENGES IN FINANCIAL STABILITY 
Planning financial stability is not an easy task for policymakers, regulatory 
bodies or market participants and several challenges exist in maintaining 
financial stability. These challenges are: 
a) Highly Complex : The financial system of India is increasingly
becoming complex and has a wide range of financial instruments and
institutions. Because of this complexity, the financial system is exposed
to various types of risks like liquidity risk, credit risk, systemic risk etc.
These risks impose a threat to the financial stability of the financial
system of our country.
b) Rising Prices: India has witnessed high inflation which can be a major
threat to its financial stability. Inflation beyond a controllable limit can
hurt the economy as it reduces the purchasing power of individuals,
reduces the value of savings, and increases the cost of borrowing, which
in turn discourages investments, and production and ultimately hurts the
economy.
c) Fiscal deficit : Fiscal deficit arises when the spending by the
government exceeds its earnings. Such a situation leads to public debt
and puts pressure on the government to increase taxes and cut spending.
All this leads to a negative impact on the economy.
d) Growing Non-performing Assets (NPAs): NPAs may be referred to as
bad loans or loans that have not been repaid. Several banks in India are
suffering from the problem of growing NPAs which may result in a
liquidity crisis and can be a major threat to the financial stability as
such bad loans reduce the profitability of financial institutions.
e) Organizational Deficiencies: Several structural challenges also exist in
the country that impose challenges on financial stability. These
organizational deficiencies arise due to the existence of a large informal


--- Page 36 ---
240 
Financial Stability inancial Stability andsector, weak infrastructure, and the absence of a robust regulatory 
framework. Such factors make it difficult for the central bank and the 
government to effectively regulate and guard economic activities, 
which can be a threat to financial stability. 
f) Outside influences: Several external factors also make India vulnerable
to managing financial stability. These outside influences can be changes
in global commodity prices, fluctuations in exchange rates, shifts in
global economic conditions etc. Such factors can have a bearing on a
country’s trade and investment flows, which can have a ripple effect on
the economy.
g) Unequal access to information : This refers to a situation where one
party in a transaction has more information than the other party. This
leads to adverse selection and moral hazard, where the party with less
information ends up making a poor decision involving excessive risk.
Such a situation is challenging and leads to distrust or lack of
confidence in the parties having less information and may lead to
financial instability.
h) Behavioural biases : Behavioural biases like herd behaviour and
overconfidence end up in an investor making a decision that involves
excessive risk and contributes to financial instability. These biases are
difficult to predict and rationalize, as they are deeply rooted in
individual and group psychology.
The objective of financial stability can be achieved through a comprehensive 
and coordinated approach that requires a deep understanding of the various 
components of the financial system and the economy in general and by 
identifying the various types of risks in particular and developing a system of 
robust regulatory framework. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) Explain the major issues in financial stability.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
2) Discuss the various challenges related to financial stability.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………


--- Page 37 ---
241 
Financial Stability and 
Related Issues 
3) How a country like India can achieve financial stability?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
26.6  RISKS AND FINANCIAL INSTABILITY 
Various types of risks that may trigger financial instability are: 
a) Cyber-security threats  can adversely impact financial stability in
various ways like disrupting the flow of funds between financial
institutions, through illegal access to sensitive financial information and
using such information to engage in fraudulent activities like money
laundering, unauthorized transactions etc. All this ultimately results in
losing the confidence of the public in the financial system which can
further result in a financial crisis. Therefore, it becomes very important
to have a robust system of cyber-laws to deal with such kinds of cyber-
attacks.
b) Systemic risk  refers to the risk that imposes a barrier in the efficient
financial system that can have a severe impact on the entire economy of
a country. There can be various sources of systemic risk like
interconnections and interdependence between the financial institutions
and markets, and the contagion effects that begin from the failure of one
institution and engulf the entire institutions or markets resulting in
widespread financial crisis. Systemic risk impacts financial stability in
many ways as it can lead to the collapse of financial institutions and
markets, can also result in a loss of confidence in the financial system
and can also lead to a contagion effect.
c) Credit risk : Credit risk arises when the borrower fails to meet its
financial obligations in time, or it may be defined as when a borrower
defaults on a loan. To control such kind of risk various techniques are
employed like checking the credibility score of the prospective
borrower before lending credit or asking for collateral etc. By applying
such kind of techniques, the risk of default may be minimized and
financial stability may be ensured.
d) Market risk : It refers to the risk that arises due to volatility in the
financial market. Market rest triggers the risk of loss arising from
changes in market price like asset price bubbles. To reduce the impact
of the market risk and ensure financial stability in a country, the
Reserve Bank of India and the various regulatory bodies apply tools
like setting interest rates, regulating the activities of the Financial
Institutions and implementing the macro-prudential policy.
e) Operational risk : It may arise due to the lack of a strong internal
system of an institution due to which problems like fraud, errors or


--- Page 38 ---
242 
Financial Stability inancial Stability andtechnical failures may trigger. To minimize the impact of operational 
risk various tools like risk management framework, internal control 
system and regulatory supervision techniques are adopted. 
f) Liquidity risk : It is a risk that arises from a shortage of liquid funds
that are required to meet the financial obligation as and when they arise
to manage the liquidity risk and ensure financial stability the
Institutions apply various methods like maintaining adequate capital
and liquidity reserves, implementing liquidity risk management etc.
g) Interest rate risk : It refers to the risk that arises due to changes in the
interest rates which have a bearing on the value of financial instruments
and have an impact on the profitability of the financial institution.
Interest rate risk can be minimized by applying various tools like stress
testing, interest rates, risk management framework etc.
h) Political risk : It refers to the risk that arises due to political events or
actions like changes in government policy, geopolitical tensions, etc.
Political risk hurts financial stability as it results in the loss of investors’
confidence and can lead to regulatory changes to minimize political
unrest. The various tools that may be applied are diversifying the
geographic exposure, implementing a proper risk management
framework etc.
26.7  STABILITY MEASURES FOR ENSURING 
FINANCIAL STABILITY 
Various ways can help in achieving the objective of financial stability: 
a) Robust regulatory framework : A robust regulatory framework is an
essential requirement for ensuring financial stability. A country
requires regulations that promote fairness and transparency,
accountability and risk management leading to a sound financial
system.
b) Macro-prudential policies : Macro-prudential policies help prevent
systemic risk thereby resulting in financial stability. These policies
include measures such as counter-cyclical capital buffers, reserve
requirements, loan-to-value ratios etc.
c) Supervision and monitoring : Through regular supervision and
monitoring of financial institutions and keeping a check on the
financial health of the institutions financial stability in the system can
be promoted. Supervision and monitoring help in identifying whether
the institutions are complying with the rules and regulations or not.
d) Crisis management framework : It refers to a framework that
consists of a set of policies and procedures that an institution may
apply to manage and respond to a crisis. A crisis management
framework is essential to ensure that financial crises are managed
effectively.


--- Page 39 ---
243 
Financial Stability and 
Related Issues 
e) Global cooperation: Financial stability is a global issue, and therefore
global cooperation is essential to ensure the stability of the financial
system. Global cooperation includes cooperation between all global
regulators, central banks of all countries and other global
organizations to coordinate policy formulation and share information
on different financial aspects.
Financial stability ensures the smooth functioning of the entire financial 
system which is very important for the growth of the company. 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) What are the various measures that may be adopted to ensure stability
in the financial system?
…………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………
2) Explain the various types of risks to the financial stability of a country
and how the same can be controlled.
…………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………
26.8  FINANCIAL STABILITY AND 
DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL 
Established in December 2010 by the Government, the Financial Stability and 
Development Council (FSDC) serves as the apex forum to strengthen 
mechanisms for upholding financial stability, reinforcing inter-regulatory 
coordination, and fostering the development of the financial sector. Chaired 
by the Union Finance Minister, its esteemed members comprise the Governor 
of the Reserve Bank of India, the Finance Secretary and/or Secretary of the 
Department of Economic Affairs, the Secretary of the Department of 
Financial Services, the Chief Economic Adviser of the Ministry of Finance, 
the Chairperson of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), the 
Chairperson of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
(IRDA), and the Chairperson of the Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority (PFRDA). 
The Council’s purview encompasses the macro-prudential supervision of the 
economy, including the oversight of large financial conglomerates, and the 
resolution of inter-regulatory coordination and financial sector development 


--- Page 40 ---
244 
Financial Stability inancial Stability andmatters. It also prioritizes initiatives concerning financial literacy and 
inclusion. 
Furthermore, an FSDC Sub-committee, chaired by the Governor of the RBI, 
convenes more frequently than the full Council. All members of the FSDC 
also hold membership in the Sub-committee, alongside the four Deputy 
Governors of the RBI and the Additional Secretary of the DEA responsible 
for FSDC affairs. The Member Secretary of the Sub-committee is the 
Executive Director of the RBI, overseeing financial stability, with the 
Financial Stability Unit (FSU) of the RBI serving as the Secretariat for the 
Sub-committee. 
26.9  FINANCIAL STABILITY REPORT 
The Financial Stability Report (FSR) is a biannual report issued by the 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI). This report presents the consolidated evaluation 
of the Sub-Committee of the Financial Stability and Development Council 
(FSDC) regarding the risks to financial stability and the robustness of the 
financial system. 
Here are the two latest Financial Stability Reports as released on 28 th 
December 2023 and 28th June 2023 (source: rbi.org.in) 
Highlights of Report released in December 2023 
The global economy confronts a multitude of challenges, including the 
prospect of decelerating growth, substantial public debt burdens, escalating 
economic fragmentation, and persistent geopolitical tensions. However, the 
Indian economy and its domestic financial system demonstrate resilience, 
underpinned by robust macroeconomic fundamentals, sound financial 
institution balance sheets, moderating inflation trends, an improving external 
trade position, and ongoing fiscal consolidation efforts. 
As of September 2023, scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) reported a 
Capital Risk-Weighted Assets Ratio (CRAR) of 16.8% and a Common Equity 
Tier 1 (CET1) ratio of 13.7%. Additionally, SCBs witnessed a decline in their 
gross non-performing assets (GNPA) ratio to a multi-year low of 3.2%, with 
the net non-performing assets (NNPA) ratio reaching 0.8%. 
Macro stress tests for credit risk indicate that SCBs are anticipated to 
maintain compliance with minimum capital requirements. System-level 
CRAR projections for September 2024 stand at 14.8%, 13.5%, and 12.2%, 
respectively, under baseline, medium, and severe stress scenarios. 
Furthermore, the non-banking financial companies (NBFCs) sector exhibits 
enhanced resilience, with a CRAR of 27.6%, a GNPA ratio of 4.6%, and a 
return on assets (ROA) of 2.9%, as recorded in September 2023. 


--- Page 41 ---
245 
Financial Stability and 
Related Issues 
Highlights of Report released in June 2023 
Amidst heightened uncertainty globally due to banking system vulnerabilities 
in certain nations, ongoing geopolitical tensions, and moderating but elevated 
inflation, the global economy faces challenges. 
Nevertheless, the Indian economy and its domestic financial system exhibit 
resilience, supported by robust macroeconomic fundamentals. Sustained 
growth momentum, decreasing inflation, a narrower current account deficit, 
escalating foreign exchange reserves, ongoing fiscal consolidation, and a 
sturdy financial system collectively propel the economy towards sustained 
growth. 
Healthy balance sheets of both banks and corporations are fostering a new 
cycle of credit and investment, enhancing the outlook for the Indian economy. 
As of March 2023, scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) achieved historical 
highs in their Capital Risk-Weighted Assets Ratio (CRAR) at 17.1% and 
Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) ratio at 13.9%. Additionally, SCBs witnessed 
a decline in their gross non-performing assets (GNPA) ratio to a 10-year low 
of 3.9%, with the net non-performing assets (NNPA) ratio decreasing to 
1.0%. 
Macro stress tests indicate the ability of SCBs to meet minimum capital 
requirements even under severe stress scenarios. Projections for the system-
level CRAR in March 2024, under baseline, medium, and severe stress 
scenarios, stand at 16.1%, 14.7%, and 13.3%, respectively. 
Highlights of Report released in June 2024 
The Reserve Bank released the 29th issue of the Financial Stability Report 
(FSR) on june 27,2024, which reflects the collective assessment of the Sub-
Committee of the Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC) on 
the resilience of the Indian financial system and risks to financial stability. 
 The global economy is facing heightened risks from prolonged
geopolitical tensions, elevated public debt, and the slow progress in the
last mile of disinflation. Despite these challenges, the global financial
system has remained resilient, and financial conditions stable.
 The Indian economy and the financial system remain robust and resilient,
anchored by macroeconomic and financial stability. With improved
balance sheets, banks and financial institutions are supporting economic
activity through sustained credit expansion.
 The capital to risk-weighted assets ratio (CRAR) and the common equity
tier 1 (CET1) ratio of scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) stood at 16.8
per cent and 13.9 per cent, respectively, at end-March 2024.
 Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs)’ gross non-performing assets
(GNPA) ratio fell to a multi-year low of 2.8 per cent and the net non-
performing assets (NNPA) ratio to 0.6 per cent at end-March 2024.


--- Page 42 ---
246 
Financial Stability inancial Stability and Macro stress tests for credit risk reveal that SCBs would be able to
comply with minimum capital requirements, with the system-level
CRAR in March 2025 projected at 16.1 per cent, 14.4 per cent and 13.0
per cent, respectively, under baseline, medium and severe stress
scenarios. These scenarios are stringent conservative assessments under
hypothetical shocks and the results should not be interpreted as forecasts.
 Non-banking financial companies (NBFCs) remain healthy, with CRAR
at 26.6 per cent, GNPA ratio at 4.0 per cent and return on assets (RoA) at
3.3 per cent, respectively, at end-March 2024.
Check Your Progress 4 
1)  What is FSDC? Why is it formed?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
2)  Mention the highlights of the Financial Stability Report published in
December 2023.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
26.10  LET US SUM UP 
This unit discussed about financial stability which is one of the important 
objectives of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). A robust financial system 
forms the backbone of any nation, and thus, maintaining financial stability is 
extremely essential. The Reserve Bank of India closely monitors the financial 
health of key components such as banks and NBFCs, identifying potential 
risks or stress points. This vigilance allows for timely interventions to prevent 
any disruptions to the financial system, thereby safeguarding financial 
stability and fostering sustained economic growth. Different factors affecting 
financial stability include macroeconomic factors, default risk factor, 
unexpected change in asset prices factor, operational risk factor, liquidity risk 
factor and lack of robust legal and regulatory framework. There could be 
several issues that can arise in maintaining financial stability. Some of them 
are systemic risk, shadow banking, cyber-security, international spill-ins and 
spill-outs etc. The objective of financial stability can be achieved through a 
comprehensive and coordinated approach that requires a deep understanding 
of the various components of the financial system and the economy in general 
and by identifying the various types of risks in particular and developing a 
system of robust regulatory framework. 


--- Page 43 ---
247 
Financial Stability and 
Related Issues 26.11  KEY WORDS 
Credit Risk : It is the probability of a financial loss resulting from a 
borrower’s failure to repay a loan. 
Liquidity Risk : Liquidity risk is the risk that a company or an 
individual will not have enough cash to meet its 
financial obligations (pay its debts) on time. 
Foreign 
Exchange Risk 
: 
Foreign exchange rate risk is the risk of financial 
impact due to exchange rate fluctuations. 
Market Risk : Market risk is the possibility that an individual or 
other entity will experience losses due to factors that 
affect the overall performance of investments in 
the financial markets.  
Financial 
Stability 
: Financial stability is defined as “a condition in which 
the financial system is not unstable”. 
Systemic Risk : Systematic risk refers to the risk inherent to the entire 
market or market segment due to a certain 
event. Examples include natural disasters, changes in 
inflation rate, war, etc. 
NBFCs : Non-banking financial companies (NBFCs), also 
known as non-banking financial institutions (NBFIs), 
are financial institutions that offer various banking 
services but do not have a banking license.  
Micro-
prudential 
norms 
:  Micro-prudential regulation focuses on the stability of 
individual banking institutions and the protection of 
their customers rather than the economy as a whole. 
Operational 
Risk 
: 
Operational risk summarizes the uncertainties and 
hazards a company faces when it attempts to do its 
day-to-day business activities within a given field or 
industry.  
26.12 SOME USEFUL BOOKS 
 Ramlall, I (2018), Understanding Financial Stability, Emerald Publishing  
 Moenjak, Thammark (2014), Central Banking: Theory and Practice in 
Sustaining Monetary and Financial Stability, Wiley Publication, 1st Edition. 
26.13 ANSWERS/ HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) Financial stability refers to a financial system that is resilient to any
shock or disruptions. The financial system consists of financial


--- Page 44 ---
248 
Financial Stability inancial Stability andinstitutions like banks, non-banking financial institutions, financial 
markets, and financial instruments. 
2) Macroeconomic factors, default risk factors, unexpected changes in asset
prices factor, operational risk factors, liquidity risk factors, lack of robust
legal and regulatory framework, and global factors.
3) War between Russia and Ukraine
Check Your Progress 2 
1) Systemic risk, shadow banking, cyber-security, international spill-ins and
spill-outs, too-big-to-fail.
2) Highly Complex, rising prices, fiscal deficit, growing non-performing
assets, organizational deficiencies, outside influences, Unequal access to
information, and Behavioural biases.
3) The objective of financial stability can be achieved through a
comprehensive and coordinated approach that requires a deep
understanding of the various components of the financial system and the
economy in general and by identifying the various types of risks in
particular and developing a system of robust regulatory framework.
Check Your Progress 3 
1) Robust regulatory framework, macro-prudential policies, supervision
and monitoring, crisis management framework, global cooperation.
2) Cyber-security threats , systemic risks, credit risks, market risks,
operational risks, liquidity risks, Interest rate risks, Political risk
Check Your Progress 4 
1) Established in December 2010 by the Government, the Financial
Stability and Development Council (FSDC) serves as the apex forum to
strengthen mechanisms for upholding financial stability, reinforcing
inter-regulatory coordination, and fostering the development of the
financial sector.
2) Refer to Section 26.9
