--- Page 105 ---
309 
Behavioural Finance Anchoring and        : 
adjustment heuristic 
Heuristic whereby a person is heavily dependent on 
the information received initially (called the 
“anchor”) and then adjusts it towards the problem 
while making decisions. 
Market Anomaly     : An anomaly is a deviation from the presently 
accepted paradigms or assumptions about the market 
which cannot be ignored as a random error. 
Availability  : 
Heuristics 
It refers to the heuristic that assesses the probability 
of occurrence of the event based on the ease with 
which it comes to the mind. 
Behavioural  : 
Finance 
It focuses on cognitive, sociological and 
psychological influences on the decision-making of 
investors and financial markets. 
Cognitive  : 
Dissonance 
It refers to the internal tension and anxiety that 
people experience when they are subjected to 
conflicting beliefs or experiences opposite to their 
prior beliefs. 
Disposition Effects  : It refers to the tendency to prematurely sell assets 
that have made financial gains while holding on to 
assets that are losing money. 
Efficient Market      : 
Hypothesis 
An investment theory argues that markets are 
efficient, and prices reflect the fundamental value of 
an asset and thus there is no scope to make excess 
profits by investing. 
Equity premium      : 
puzzle 
The equity premium puzzle refers to the inability of 
traditional finance models to explain the average 
equity risk premium over bonds. 
Herding  : Herding is the outcome of social learning when 
people believe that others are better informed and 
thus follow the crowd. 
Heuristics  : Heuristics or ‘rules of thumb’ are imperfect but 
functional shortcuts that help investors simplify 
complex situations and make quick decisions. 
Loss Aversion  : Investors find losses to be more painful as compared 
to the pleasure from gains. Loss aversion makes 
people prefer things as they are. 
Mental Accounting : Mental accounting refers to a set of cognitive 
operations that investors use to classify their money 
differently in different portfolios based on various 
subjective criteria. 
Predictability  : 
Puzzle 
Stock returns are predictable suggesting that 
persistent profits are not being eroded by arbitrage. 


--- Page 106 ---
310 
Financial Stability Random Walk  : It refers to past movements or trends of a stock price 
or market that cannot be used to predict its future 
movement and it is not possible to outperform the 
market without assuming additional risk. 
Representativeness : 
Heuristic 
In situations of uncertainty, people evaluate the 
probability of an uncertain event by comparing it to 
an existing prototype that already exists in our minds. 
Sunk Cost Fallacy   : It describes an emotional tendency to invest more 
money, time, and effort into a project where we have 
already invested even if a person knows that the 
investment is going to fail. 
Theory of Regret     : When an investment goes bad, people act irrationally 
by trying to avoid selling it to avoid feelings of 
regret. 
Volatility Puzzle      : The volatility puzzle reflects the high variability of 
stock prices having large dispersions 
Law of One Price    : The law says that identical securities have identical 
prices because prices are based on fundamental 
values. The law of one price limits the opportunity to 
arbitrage. 
29.9  SOME USEFUL BOOKS 
Baddeley, Michelle (2013). Behavioural Economics and Finance. Routledge. 
Chapter 11: Financial Instability 
Ranyard, Rob(2018) Economic Psychology. British Psychological Society 
and Wiley. Chapter 15: Behaviour in Financial Markets. 
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1986). Judgment under uncertainty: 
Heuristics and biases. In H. R. Arkes & K. R. Hammond (Eds.), Judgment 
and decision making: An interdisciplinary reader  (pp. 38–55). Cambridge 
University Press. (This chapter originally appeared in "Science," 1974, 185, 
1124-1131) 
29.10  ANSWERS OR HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) It focuses on cognitive, sociological and psychological influences on the
decision-making of investors and financial markets.
2) In efficient markets, the price reflects its fundamental value and all the
available information, that investors act rationally, have self-control and
act in self-interest.


--- Page 107 ---
311 
Behavioural Finance 3) c
4) a
Check Your Progress 2 
1) Traditional finance centres around the idea of investor rationality
whereas Behavioural finance considers the influence of various biases in
investment decision making.
Traditional finance assumes the availability of complete information,
Behavioural finance, on the other hand, centres around the idea of
bounded rationality.
Traditional finance centres around the ‘Efficient market hypothesis’.
Behavioural finance discusses various anomalies that lead to market
volatility and cannot be explained through EMH.
Classical finance theory asserts fact that any noise is balanced out by
rational traders but behavioural finance asserts that there is a limit to
arbitrage and prices are not always right.
2) Refer to Section 1.4
3) B
4) A.
Check Your Progress 3 
1) These are Fundamental anomalies, Technical anomalies, and Calendar or
seasonal anomalies (refer to Sub-section 29.5.2).
2) Myopic loss aversion and ambiguity aversion explain the equity
premium puzzle.
3) Various cognitive, social and emotional biases lead to sub-optimal
decision-making by the investors which in turn affect the stock market
and stock prices.
4) d
Check Your Progress 4 
1) These are Over-Confidence, Cognitive dissonance, Under-reaction and
over-reaction, Disposition effects, Diversification bias, and Mental
Accounting (refer to Sub-section 29.6.2 for details).
2) The sunk cost fallacy describes an emotional tendency to invest more
money, time, and effort into a project where we have already invested
even if a person knows that the investment is going to fail.
3) a)   Herding 
b) Self-attribution bias
c) Disposition effect
d) Loss aversion


--- Page 108 ---
312 
Financial Stability 29.11  TERMINAL QUESTIONS 
1) How is behavioural finance different from traditional finance?
2) Behavioural Finance posits that heuristics help investors to make
decisions quickly. Discuss the various heuristics and how are they
applied by investors. Elaborate on the biases that these heuristics cause.
3) Give behavioural explanations to various market puzzles that are not
addressed by traditional finance.
4) Describe various anomalies in the Efficient Markets Hypothesis.
5) Bring out the cognitive influences on investors that lead to various
biases in decision-making.
6) Explain social influences on investors’ decision-making
7) What are the various emotional influences that bias investor decision-
making?
8) Define:
a) Sunk cost fallacy
b) Herding
c) Loss aversion
d) Mental accounting
e) Diversification bias
9) What is the Theory of Regret? How does it influence decision-making?
10) Describe the equity premium puzzle.
11) Describe predictability puzzle
12) ‘Behavioural finance is ‘micro efficient’ but not macro efficient’.
Comment.
