--- Page 47 ---
 
 
 
181 
Impossible Trinity: 
Alternative 
Scenarios 
9.4 IMPOSSIBLE TRINITY: ALTERNATIVE 
SCENARIOS COUNTRIES’ EXPERIENCE 
The choices made by policymakers are not so clear-cut. The concept of the 
impossible trinity went from theoretical curiosity to becoming the foundation 
of open economy macroeconomics in the 1980s, by which time capital 
controls had broken down in many countries, and conflicts were visible 
between pegged exchange rates and monetary policy autonomy. While one 
version of the impossible trinity is focused on the extreme case – with a perfectly 
fixed exchange rate and a perfectly open capital account, a country has absolutely 
no autonomous monetary policy; the real world has thrown up repeated examples 
where capital controls are loosened, resulting in greater exchange rate rigidity 
and less monetary-policy autonomy. 
Europe's exchange rate mechanism  (ERM) was born after the death of the 
Bretton Woods System. No member v iolated the impossible trinity. The German 
unification in 1989 was the first big shock. The second big shock was the single 
market. The single market required capital mobility and free movement of 
capital. With fixed exchange rates and no control over capi tal, member nations 
had to implicitly give up their autonomy over monetary policy. Since Germany 
was the biggest economy, they aligned themselves with the policies of Germany's 
Bundes Bank. But the reunification called for a very tight monetary policy in 
Germany and, therefore, in other member -nations. Britain needed something 
loose and different. Britain walked out of the ERM because it knew that the 
impossible trinity could not be violated. Britain regained interest rate autonomy, 
retained capital mobility and regained floating exchange rates. This explains why 
Britain is a non-euro country. 
In practice, many emerging markets are fearful of letting the exchange rate move 
sharply, so they choose to sacrifice either free capital mobility (by introducing 
capital controls, or by adding to or depleting their foreign -currency reserves) or 
monetary independence, by giving priority to currency stability over other 
targets. China for instance is currently up against the classic trilemma involving 
the impossible trio. The country wants to keep the Yuan stable because it aspires 
to make it an international reserve currency akin to the US dollar. So the currency 
is allowed to fluctuate only 2 per cent on either side of a peg determined by the 
Chinese central bank. China is also trying to accelerate the move towards making 
the Yuan freely convertible as that is one of the prerequisites for an international 
currency. Attempting to sustain the current rate of exchange will lead to the 
depletion of forex reserves. This is im peding China from following the 
independent monetary policy needed to kick -start growth. China wants 
eventually to liberalise its capital account as a stepping stone to a modern 
financial system. To do so, it will have to live with a volatile yuan.  
With open capital markets and a currency board, Hong Kong implicitly accepts 
foreign monetary policy, which can sometimes be too tight or too easy. The fixed 


--- Page 48 ---
 
 
 
182 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments exchange rate provides a stable environment for importers and exporters. 
Countries such as Australia and  New Zealand have chosen domestic price 
stability in the form of an inflation target, and accept a high degree of exchange 
rate volatility. India has a multiple indicators approach and looks at everything. 
Surging capital flows is a problem in most countri es. Countries like Korea, NZ 
and the Philippines have inflation targets and capital flows have been a problem 
with them. Ideally, there should have seen some appreciation in these countries. 
However, the currency has appreciated only in India, Korea and China from 1994 
levels. The consensus is to have free capital inflows, have a stable monetary 
policy and let the currency float. 
India has been able to actively manage the exchange rate and limit exchange rate 
volatility relative to other emerging market eco nomies, by building up 
international reserves and intervening actively in the foreign exchange market. 
Such reserve management has also helped to some extent in regaining control 
over monetary policy even in the face of capital inflows. However, the steps RBI 
took in 2013 to defend the currency have resulted in a reversal of the direction of 
interest rates in the economy. The then RBI governor D. Subbarao , in his 
statement on the review of the monetary policy on 30 July 2013 noted that India 
is currently ca ught in a classic ' impossible trinity’. Put differently, to protect the 
rupee, RBI has lost some independence in how it makes the monetary policy.  
In sum , in the modern world, given the growth of  trade in goods and services  
along with fast paced of financial innov ation and lacking effective control over 
the free movement of capital, the impossible trinity asserts that a country has to 
choose between reducing currency volatility and running a stabilising monetary 
policy.  It cannot do both. The combination of the th ree policies is known to 
cause the financial crisis. The Mexican peso crisis  (1994–1995), the 1997 Asian 
financial crisis (1997–1998), and the Argentinean financial collapse (2001–2002) 
are often cited as examples. In particular, the East Asian crisis (1997 –1998) is 
widely known as a large -scale financial crisis caused by the combination of the 
three policies which violate the impossible trinity.  Mundell always says to let 
capital flow and defend exchange rates.  Hélène Rey  has observed that “for the 
past few decades, international macroeconomics has po stulated the ‘ trilemma’: 
with free capital mobility, independent monetary policies are feasible if and only 
if exchange rates are floating. The global financial cycle transforms the trilemma 
into a ‘ dilemma’ or an ‘ irreconcilable duo ’: independent monetary  policies are 
possible if and only if the capital account is managed”. 
In this context, it is well to remember what James Rickards has emphasized; 
there is one big exception to the impossible trinity. That's the United States. The 
U.S. sets interest rates independently and has an open capital account. The U.S. 
does not officially peg the dollar to any other currency (thus technically not 
breaking the Impossible Trinity). But it does work with other countries to allow 
them to informally peg to the dollar. Wh y does the U.S. not suffer adverse 


--- Page 49 ---
 
 
 
183 
Impossible Trinity: 
Alternative 
Scenarios 
consequences? Because the U.S. does not need foreign exchange. The dollar is 
the leading reserve currency in the world (about 60% of global reserves and 
about 80% of global payments), so the U.S. can never run out of fore ign 
exchange to pay for things, it can just print more dollars! This is what the French 
called the dollar's ‘Exorbitant Privilege’ in the 1960s. 
Check Your Progress 2 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Why is it difficult for countries to circumvent the impossible trinity? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Discuss the policies adopted by European countries 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Give examples of financial crises because of the non -observance of the 
impossible trinity. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
9.5 IMPORTANCE OF IMPOSSIBLE TRINITY  
The model serves as an introduction to the formal theory of policymaking. This 
model cannot be relegated to textbooks only. It affects the policies of countries 
and central banks across the globe.  This concept is impossible to ignore, 
especially if one is a keen follower of macros. Theoretically, policy -makers 
should manage macroeconomic policies following the rule that ‘ for each goal 
might correspond only one macroeconomic policy instrument ’. This means that 
even a floating exchange rate regime does not release policy -makers from facing 
the ‘trilemma’ of economic policy. No government can achieve more targets than 
it has instruments. The Mundell model implied an optimal assignment and, more 
important, was drawn up within the Tinbergian target-instrument framework. 
Many of the more sophisticated models followed have continued in this tradition.  
In this regard, the Mundell-Fleming model has been successful in the theoretical 
predictions in matching empirical facts such as the effects of U.S. 
macroeconomic policies in the 1980s and helping explain the model's influence 
among academics and policymakers. Mundell's contribution to international 
macroeconomics is extraordinary. The ‘impossible trinity’ is among his best. It is 


--- Page 50 ---
 
 
 
184 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments axiomatic. Understanding and using the impossible trinity works wonders if one 
can spot the right conditions and set up the trades in advance of the inevitable 
policy failures o f the central banks. Those failures (which do happen) represent 
some of the best profit -making opportunities of all. While citing the example of 
England, James Rickards  has observed how by understanding the impossible 
trinity George Soros  broke the Bank of  England on September 16, 1992 (still 
referred to as ‘ Black Wednesday ’ in British banking circles). Soros also made 
over $1 billion  that day. The importance of the concept may be recapitulated as 
under:  
i) The impossible trinity is a tool to separate countries with good policies from 
those with bad policies. It is also a tool used to make accurate forecasts based 
on the sustainability of those policies. 
ii) Using the impossible trinity to spot trends and make investment decisions 
requires a lot of analysis. There are three policies that can go wrong (A, B, 
and C above), and three ways to fix them (again, A, B, and C). That gives 
nine basic scenarios (3 x 3 = 9), and many more when one considers hybrid 
or combined policies, (a country could devalue its currency and slap on 
capital controls at the same time). There are always expert practitioners on 
the lookout for non-sustainable policies that are bound to break. This is a kind 
of strategic intelligence.  
iii) The policy challenges associated with the ‘ impossible trinity ’ have become 
more relevant to developing countries as more and more of them have taken 
steps to liberalize the capital account of their balance of p ayments to permit 
freer flows. Over the years, several countries have mishandled this trilemma. 
It is important to remember that domestic policy -makers should not deviate 
from this discipline from time to time.  
iv) Countries must keep in mind the key lessons to be drawn from the experience 
of other countries. Flouting the basic premises of the Mundell – Fleming 
model (the ‘ impossible trinity ’) has inevitable consequences. It leads to 
unsustainable macroeconomic imbalances. Failure to take early remedial 
action would result in a steady deterioration of macroeconomic fundamentals. 
The earlier the remedial measures are implemented the less painful will be 
the adjustment. The painful corrective austerity measures have eventual 
political costs, particularly if stabi lization measures are implemented without 
supporting structural reforms which strengthen the growth framework of the 
economy. 
v) Impossible trinity has highlighted the main challenges that emerging 
economies face today as they integrate with global capital ma rkets in 
managing the trade-offs between the trinity. The rise in the volatility of global 
capital flows has made macroeconomic management increasingly complex, 
especially for emerging economies that are striving to achieve a balance 
between the diverse ob jectives of robust growth rate, sustainable current 


--- Page 51 ---
 
 
 
185 
Impossible Trinity: 
Alternative 
Scenarios 
account deficit, competitive exchange rate, access to adequate external capital 
for financing investment, moderate inflation, and sufficient international 
reserves. This has also reignited the debate on s uitable macroeconomic 
management measures. Sooner or later bad economics becomes bad politics . 
The authorities must move beyond politics to embark upon sound economic 
policy-making which recognises the discipline imposed by the ' impossible 
trinity’.  
9.6 IMPOSSIBLE TRINITY AND DEMAND FOR 
CAPITAL ACCOUNT CONVERTIBILITY (CAC) 
OF INDIA’S RUPEE 
The move towards making the Indian rupee fully convertible on the capital 
account has attracted considerable debate. The critics have claimed that full 
convertibility or capital mobility and freely floating exchange rates are inimical 
to India's interests. The critics have referred to Britain's crisis in 1992 and the 
Asian crisis in 1997 to buttress their criticism. However, the criticisms have been 
contested by the advo cates of capital account convertibility. Advocates have 
argued that capital mobility and freely floating exchange rates are not joint policy 
issues. One can exist without the other. The crisis in Britain erupted when 
policymakers understood the axiomatic i nviolability of the impossible trinity. 
The Asian crisis was craftily brewed by central banks that dodged the impossible 
trinity.  
In a managed float economy, the rupee floats somewhat. Although the rupee is 
not pegged to any currency, India does not allow  free movement on the capital 
account. Capital control is put in place to preserve financial stability as large 
inflows and outflows can lead to financial instability.  The RBI is not defending 
the rupee by selling foreign currency in the market, but if it did, the impact on the 
interest rate would have been the same. Selling foreign exchange would reduce 
the supply of rupees in the market which would have resulted in higher rates.  But 
the RBI has made it clear that it would like to move towards full convert ibility 
over the long term. If that happens, RBI may not be able to maintain the right 
reign on interest rates. An independent monetary policy will be difficult given 
that the rupee is nowhere close to becoming a reserve currency like the dollar. 
The researchers have observed that India's capital account liberalization that 
began in  the early 1990s has since then been a steady albeit slow and gradual 
process. Regarding opening up the financial markets to foreign investment, 
Indian authorities have alwa ys proceeded with a lot of caution and apparent 
scepticism about the benefits of foreign capital balanced against the potential 
instability that such capital inflows might trigger. On one hand foreign capital 
offers a diversification of opportunities to in vestors and provides avenues to 
bridge the gap between domestic saving and investment, and on the other  
unbridled flows can fuel inflationary pressures, fan asset price bubbles, and 


--- Page 52 ---
 
 
 
186 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments sudden reversals in capital inflows can lead to instabilities and even cr ises in 
financial and currency markets. The decade of the 1990s was replete with several 
such incidents of financial crises all over the emerging world as seen in Mexico 
(1994), East Asia (1997), Russia (1998), Brazil (1999) and eventually Argentina 
(2000). Rampant volatile debt inflows in the domestic economies triggered all 
these episodes of crises. (Reddy, 2008). 
Though India is now more open in absolute terms than it used to be during the 
early 1990s, the cautious and gradual approach towards capital ac count 
liberalization has meant that India has significantly lagged behind other 
countries. Even today, more than two decades after India started opening up its 
capital account, there exists an extensive array of restrictive controls imposed by 
authorities on different categories of foreign investment to actively manage the 
capital account. India’s capital account seems to be only partially open and the 
exchange rate is in a managed floating regime. India has also been accumulating 
large amounts of foreign currency reserves since the early 2000s. 
India does not allow free movement on the capital account. Capital control is put 
in place to preserve financial stability as large inflows and outflows can lead to 
financial instability. Issues related to the capital account constitute a subject upon 
which divergent views have existed and a professional consensus is yet to 
emerge. CAC is not a standalone objective but a means for higher and stable 
growth. There is no need or use to hustling towards CACs; the movement  should 
be at a pace the country is comfortable with, considering all relevant factors and 
the environment, in which the country has to function. 
Check Your Progress 3 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  What are the implications of the impossible trinity in policymaking? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Why do we study the impossible trinity? Point out its practical significance. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) What is capital account convertibility (CAC)? How are capital A/c 
convertibility and current A/c convertibility different? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 


--- Page 53 ---
 
 
 
187 
Impossible Trinity: 
Alternative 
Scenarios 
9.7  LET US SUM UP 
After completion of this unit, you will understand that, t he impossible trinity also 
called the Mundell -Fleming trilemma or simply the trilemma expresses the 
limited options available to countries in setting monetary policy. According to 
this theory, a country cannot simultaneously achieve the free flow of capital, a 
fixed exchange rate and independent monetary policy. Pursuing any two of these 
options necessarily closes off the third.  
The ‘ impossible trinity ' is a fundamental contribution of the Mundell -Fleming 
framework. Confronted with this Trilemma policymakers have to choose a 
combination of any two objectives because all three goals can be mutually 
inconsistent.  
Today most countries allow their currencies to float. That way, the currency 
adjusts to the waxing and waning of capital flows, allowing interest rate s to 
respond to the domestic business cycle. The trilemma is not as simple as it 
appears since most countries lack monetary policy independence whether or not 
they have free exchange rates and capital flows. The reason has to do with the 
overwhelming influence of the Federal Reserve.  
With autonomous monetary policy, the exchange rate is on autopilot. With fixed 
exchange rates, the monetary policy is on autopilot. This is what makes the entire 
learning so good. One not only knows what the impossible trinity is, but one also 
knows which country is doing what. 
India adopted a calibrated and hierarchical approach towards capital account 
liberalization, pr ioritizing some flows over others.  CAC need not be India’s 
overriding priority. 
9.8 KEY WORDS 
Trade-offs Something is being given up for something 
else. 
Asian financial crisis The Asian Financial Crisis of 1997 (also called 
the ‘Asian Contagion’)was a financial crisis 
that affected many Asian countries, including 
South Korea, Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, 
Singapore and the Philippines. After posting 
some of the most impressive growth rates in the 
world at the time, the so -called ‘tiger  
economies' saw their stock markets and 
currencies lose about 70% of their value. 
Tinbergen target-
instrument framework 
According to the well -accepted 'Tinbergen 
Rule’ a policy instrument can be effective only 
if it has a single objective. No government can 
achieve more targets than it has instruments. 


--- Page 54 ---
 
 
 
188 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments For example, when there are two targets, two 
policy instruments are requ ired to achieve both 
objectives. The interest rate is better suited to 
target domestic imbalances. Targeting 
exchange rates through market intervention is 
better suited to targeting external imbalances. 
The Tinbergen Rule has been used to criticise 
multi-target policy instruments for being 
inefficient. 
Macroeconomics Management  Management of issues relating to GDP, fiscal 
policy, monetary policy, trade policy, growth 
strategies, sovereign wealth funds, etc.  
Capital account 
convertibility (CAC) 
Is a feature of a nation's financial regime that 
centres on the ability to conduct transactions of 
local financial assets into foreign financial 
assets freely or at country-determined exchange 
rates. 
Financial Integration There is no universal definition of ‘financial 
integration’. Nevertheless, the term typically 
encompasses concepts like financial openness, 
free movement of capital and integration of 
financial services. The Financial System 
Inquiry of 2014 considered financial integration 
to be a country’s ‘financial connectedness’ with 
other countries, noting that greater financial 
integration tends to increase capital flows and 
equalise prices and returns on traded financial 
assets in different countries. 
International Reserves International reserves are any kind of reserve 
funds that can be passed between the central 
banks of different countries. International 
reserves are an acceptable form of payment 
between these banks. The reserves themselves 
can either be gold or el se a specific currency, 
such as the dollar or euro.  
Capital control Capital control represents any measure taken by 
a government, central bank or other regulatory 
body to limit the flow of foreign capital in and 
out of the domestic economy. These controls  
include taxes, tariffs, outright legislation and 
volume restrictions, as well as market -based 
forces. Capital controls can affect many asset 


--- Page 55 ---
 
 
 
189 
Impossible Trinity: 
Alternative 
Scenarios 
classes such as equities, bonds and foreign 
exchange trades. 
Capital movement The transfer of capital between coun tries. It 
refers to the movement of money for 
investment, trade or business production, 
including the flow of capital within 
corporations in the form of investment capital, 
capital spending on operations and research and 
development (R&D). 
Sterilized Intervention Is the purchase or sale of foreign currency by a 
central bank to influence the exchange value of 
the domestic currency, without changing the 
monetary base. Empirical evidence suggests 
that sterilized intervention is generally 
incapable of altering exchange rates. 
9.9  SOME USEFUL REFERENCES 
Acharyya, Rajat (2014): International Economics, 1st edition, Oxford University 
Press, New Delhi  
Carbaugh, Robert J (2015): International Economics , 11 th edition, Cengage 
Learning India Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi  
Gowland, David (2012): International Economics, Chapter 7, Barnes and Nobl e 
Books, Totowa, New Jersey, USA 
Krugman, Paul R. , Maurice Obstfeld , and Marc Melitz   (2014): International 
Economics: Theory and Policy , 10 th edition, Pearson Education Ltd., Harlow, 
England, UK  
Mundell–Fleming model 
http://gobernanzamedioambiental.org/brugger/Mundell%E2%80%93Fleming%2
0model.pdf (contains contributions of Andyjsmith, AtD, Atlastawake, Beacharn, 
Beland, Bender235, Charles Matthews, Earth, Eric Shalov, Excirial, Hu12, 
Jackzhp, Jamila89, Jastrow, John Quiggin, Luizabpr, Maurreen, OdileB, RJFJR, 
Radagast83, Rich Farmbrough, Rinconsoleao, SimonP, Skapur, Yalst, 80 
anonymous edits) 
Oxelheim, L. (1990): International Financial Integration , Berlin, Springer 
Verlag 
Rey, Hélène (2015) : Dilemma not Trilemma: the global financial cycle and 
monetary policy independence, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working 
Paper 21162 (http://www.nber.org/papers/w21162.pdf) 
Salvatore, Dominick (2004): International Economy, 8th edition, Wiley India Pvt. 
Ltd., New Delhi 


--- Page 56 ---
 
 
 
190 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments Sengupta, Rajeswari (2015): The Impossible Trinity: Where does India stand? 
Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research, WP-2015-05, Mumbai, March  
http://www.igidr.ac.in/pdf/publication/WP-2015-05.pdf 
What is the Impossible Trinity? 
https://dailyreckoning.com/what-is-the-impossible-trinity/ 
9.10  ANSWERS/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES  
Check your progress 1 
1) See section 9.2 
2) See section 9.3 
3) See section 9.3 
Check your progress 2  
1) See section 9.4 
2) See section 9.4 
3) See section 9.4 
Check your progress 3 
1) See section 9.5 
2) See section 9.5 
3) See section 9.6 
