--- Page 29 ---
 
 
 
163 
Components of 
Balance of Payments 3) Distinguish between the current and capital account of BoP. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
4) What is the significance of balancing items of the BoP account? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
8.6 BoP ACCOUNTING: AN EXA MPLE OF INDIA’S 
BoP 
Let us understand various components of BoP by having an example of India‟s 
BoP. The following table illustrates the items mentioned in BoP of India and a 
brief account of the items is explained below the table.   
Table 
8.1: India's Overall Balance of Payments - US Dollar 
 
(US $ Million) 
Item/Year  2021-22  
Credit Debit Net 
1 17 18 19 
A. Current account       
1. Merchandise 429164 618623 -189459 
2. Invisibles (a+b+c) 369600 218906 150694 
a) Services 254527 147011 107516 
b) Transfers 89322 8875 80447 
c) Income 25751 63020 -37269 
Total Current account (1+2) 798764 837529 -38766 
B. Capital account       
1. Foreign investment  478000 456191 21809 
2. Loans  105457 71851 33605 
3. Banking capital  102886 96217 6669 
4. Rupee debt service 0 71 -71 
5. Other capital 75059 51265 23794 
Total capital account (1 to 5) 761402 675595 85807 
C. Errors & omissions 1433 974 459 
D. Overall balance  1561599 1514098 47501 
E. Monetary movements (i+ii) 16024 63524 -47501 
i) I.M.F. 0 0 0 
ii) Foreign exchange reserves (Increase - / 
Decrease+) 16024 63524 -47501 
G.n.i.e.: Government not included elsewhere. 
Notes: 1. Data for 2021-22 are preliminary estimates 
2. Total may not tally due to rounding off. 
Source:  The Handbook of Statistics  on the  Indian Economy 2021 -22, RBI, 
Mumbai 


--- Page 30 ---
 
 
 
164 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments The Table 8.1, exemplifies India‟s BoP account for the financial year 2021 -22. It 
shows the main items of transactions with some simplifications. The total 
receipts in the trading account show the balance from exports and imports of 
merchandise only. These include the physical movement of goods, i.e. 
manufacturing products, semi-finished goods, capital goods, raw materials, 
agricultural products, etc. During 2021-22, India has a deficit in trade account to 
the extent of -189459 million $. This trade account deficit is because of excess 
merchandise imports (debit) over merchandise exports (credit). The next item is 
Invisibles which are divided into three components: (i) services, (ii) transfer 
payments, and (c) investment income.  
Services include (a) travel and tourism; (b) transportation; (c) financial and other 
services including insurance; (d) government; (e) software services exports, etc.  
Investment income refers to receipts (credit) and payments (debit) of dividends, 
interests, and profits arising out of Indian investments abroad and foreign 
investments in India.  
Transfer payments do not represent payment for any direct service rendered or 
any physical transfer of goods. They are like foreign aid, gifts, foreign workers' 
remittances to their home countries, etc. Workers‟ remittances are sizable 
amounts ($80447 million) and form a very important component of transfer 
payment accounts in India. It is to be noted that mainly on account of this a 
surplus of $107516 million was achieved under this head during 2021-22.  
The current account 
balance of $ 38766 million (a sum of items I and II) refers to 
the balance in flows of goods (merchandise) and services and other current 
receipts and payments (investment income and transfer payments) between 
countries. India had a deficit in the trading account (item –I) and a surplus in the 
invisible account (item –II) but owing to the large deficit in the trading account 
India had a net deficit in the current account (item III) to the tune of $ 38766 
million. 
The capital account is a miscellaneous account. The two main types of 
transactions in the capital account on the credit (or receipt) side are foreign 
investments and borrowing abroad. These are the import of capital, but unlike the 
import of goods and services, these are mentioned on the credit side because the 
import of capital means foreign exchange earned. The corresponding debit (or 
payments) items are investments abroad and leading. Taking all the items into 
account one gets total capital account payments and receipts. The table shows 
that India had a capital account surplus during 2021-22 to the tune of $ 85807 
million.  
Despite transactions being recorded, based on the double-entry method 
discrepancies crop up between debits and credits because of data lags and other 
estimation problems. These discrepancies are captured under ' errors‟ and 
„omissions‟. A negative value indicates that receipts are overstated, payments are 


--- Page 31 ---
 
 
 
165 
Components of 
Balance of Payments understated, or both, and vice versa. The overall balance is obtained as a sum of 
the current account and capital account after adjusting for errors and omissions. 
India had an overall surplus balance of $47501 million in 2021-22. An overall 
surplus means that India has a claim on the rest of the world.  
The monetary movement account of BoP records changes in the amount of 
„official‟ reserve assets. Official reserve assets include gold, foreign currencies, 
and the IMF's special drawing rights (SDRs) reserve positions.  The deficit 
means that the rest of the world has a claim on India, which is an asset for the rest 
of the world. The deficit is officially settled by corresponding entry on the credit 
side as import of capital or increase in foreign currency reserves. 
Check Your Progress 3 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Briefly explain the elements of BoP accounting. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) What do you mean by the monetary movement account of BoP? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) What is the overall balance? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
4) What are transfer payments? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
8.7 NATURE AND IMPLICATIONS OF 
DISEQUILIBRIUM 
The problem of judging the equilibrium position of a country‟s balance of 
payments becomes fairly complicated and takes outside the sphere of 
bookkeeping. According to Czinkota, the mechanics of disequilibrium in BoP 
often follow a similar path of development: 
i) A country that experiences a rapidly expanding current account deficit will 
simultaneously build financial account surpluses. 


--- Page 32 ---
 
 
 
166 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments ii) The capital that flows into a company, giving rise to the financial account 
surplus, acts, as the „financing‟ for the growing merchandise/services deficits-
the constituent components of the current account deficit.  
iii) Some events, whether it is a report, a speech, or an action by a government or 
business inside or outside the country, raises questions about the country's 
economic stability. Investors of many kinds, portfolio and direct investors in 
the country fearing economic problems in the near future, withdraw capital 
from the country rapidly to avoid any exposure to this risk. This is prudent of 
the individual but catastrophic for the whole if all individuals move similarly.  
iv) The rapid withdrawal of capital from the country, also known as  „ capital 
flight‟, results in the loss of the financial account surplus, creating severe 
deficits in the country‟s overall balance of payments. This is typically 
accompanied by rapid currency depreciation (if a floating-rate currency) or 
currency devaluation (if a fixed-rate currency).   
International debt and economic crises have occurred for as long as there have 
been international trade and commerce.  And they all will occur again.  Each 
crisis has its unique characteristics , but all follow some of the economic 
fundamentals. There are several causes and each country will have a unique set 
of circumstances. In short, some of the common wider economic effects of the 
BoP crisis or disequilibrium are:  
i) need to import financial capital to achieve balance;   
ii) currency weakness  and higher inflation;  
iii) may run short of vital foreign currency reserves; 
iv) lack of price/non-price competitiveness; 
v) can lead to capital flight/loss of investor confidence.  
A current account deficit, if persistent, is not sustainable because, on the one 
hand, foreign capital may take a dim view of the country‟s ability to meet its 
foreign obligations and, therefore, cut down the flows, and on the other hand, 
monetary movements, particularly domestic reserve account may also find the 
deficit unmanageable and get drained. Since a deficit represents an imbalance 
between demand for and supply of foreign exchange, a persistent presence of this 
imbalance can destabilize the currency.  
A persistent surplus in the current account is also not desirable because it means 
that either the country invests the surplus abroad for another country's 
development or it allows its currency to appreciate. The former does not add to 
GDP; the latter slows down GDP growth by crowding out exports. What is 
desirable is a current account surplus, as it enhances the capacity of the country 
to generate an excess of exports over imports, sufficient to pay for charges on 
account of interest or dividends on foreign capital.
 


--- Page 33 ---
 
 
 
167 
Components of 
Balance of Payments 8.8 POLICY MEASURES FOR CORRECTING 
DISEQUILIBRIUM 
Several policies can be introduced to improve a country's trade balance. The 
measures are:  
i) Adjustment through Exchange Depreciation.  
ii) Devaluation or Expenditure-Switching Policy.  
iii) Direct Controls. 
iv) Adjustment through Capital Movements.  
v) Adjustment through Income Changes.  
vi) Stimulation of Exports and Import Substitutes.  
vii) Expenditure-Reducing Policies. 
Some of these measures focus on changing the growth of demand while others 
look to improve an economy's supply-side competitiveness. As with any 
macroeconomic „problem,' effective policies are those that target the underlying 
causes. The real solution lies in earning more foreign exchange through 
additional exports or reducing imports. Quantitative changes in exports and 
imports require policy changes. Such policy measures are in the form of 
monetary, fiscal and non-monetary measures. Non-monetary methods are more 
effective than monetary methods and are normally applicable in correcting an 
adverse balance of payments.  
There are two possible courses of action: expenditure reduction policy or 
expenditure-switching policy  or some combination of both. The expenditure 
reduction policy aims to dampen the level of aggregate demand in the domestic 
economy so that the demand for imported goods and services is reduced. 
Unfo
rtunately, dealing with a balance of payments deficit in this way has 
deleterious consequences for some of the other major macroeconomic objectives. 
Thus a lower level of demand is likely to constrain and affect an increase in 
unemployment. Balance of payments equilibrium should not be relentlessly 
pursued at the expense of other goals or objectives.  
Expenditure-switching policies  intend to switch domestic and foreign demand 
away from foreign goods and towards home-produced goods. The objective is to 
encourage overseas residents to buy more exports and to induce domestic 
residents to purchase home-produced goods and services instead of imports. This 
requires modifications in consumption behaviour. The most obvious method is to 
devalue the domestic currency. Currency devaluation induces relative price 
changes that favour the products of the devaluing economy. There must be a 
reasonable degree of price elasticity of demand for exports and imports. It is 
generally recognized that the price elasticity of demand for exports plus the price 


--- Page 34 ---
 
 
 
168 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments elasticity of demand for imports must be greater than 1 (the noted Marshall-
Lerner condition).  
It should be noted that several additional measures are available to governments, 
each of which also has expenditure-switching properties. These include import 
controls, export promotion, and the promotion of domestic industry by fiscal or 
other means. A realistic exchange rate, low tariffs, and minimal trade transaction 
costs should guide exports. To sum up,
 the correction of disequilibrium calls for a 
judicious combination of the following measures: 
i) Monetary and fiscal changes affecting income and prices in the country; 
ii) Exchange rate adjustment, i.e., devaluation or appreciation of the home 
currency; 
iii) Trade restrictions, i.e., tariffs, quotas, etc.; and 
iv) Capital movement, i.e., borrowing or lending aboard. 
No reliance can be placed on any single tool. There is room for more than one 
approach and more than one device. But the application of the tools depends on 
the nature of the disequilibrium. Countries can be in very different positions 
concerning the balance of payments. It is, important to understand a countr y‟s 
balance-of-payments situation intelligently. To understand the nature of a deficit 
one has to judge it against the background of the general economic policy of a 
country and the policy means a country has at its disposal. The country must in 
general try to implement policy measures aimed at reducing the deficit. Surpluses 
do not usually create great problems. International capital flows play an 
important part in equilibrating the balance of payments.
 
Check Your Progress 4 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  What are the common wider economic effects of BoP disequilibrium? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Why is a persistent surplus in the current account not desirable? Give reasons.  
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 


--- Page 35 ---
 
 
 
169 
Components of 
Balance of Payments 3) Why is a persistent deficit in the balance of payments undesirable? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
4) What policy measures are available for a country to achieve an improvement 
in a country‟s BoP? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
8.9  LET US SUM UP 
In this unit, we discussed about various components of Balance of Payments.  
Balance of payments (BoP) is a record of the values of all economic transactions 
of a country with the rest of the world in a particular year. Two types of 
transactions dominate the balance of payments. One is real assets  like the 
exchanges of goods and services and the other is financial assets 
consisting of the 
exchange of financial claims (for example, stock, bonds, loans, purchases or sales 
of companies) in exchange for other financial claims or money. The Balance of 
Trade deals only with the export and import of merchandise or visible items. It is 
just one part of the balance of payments.   
The current account of the balance of payments refers to the monetary value of 
international flows associated with transactions in goods and services, income 
flows and unilateral transfers. Capital transactions consist of capital transfers and 
the acquisition and disposal of certain nonfinancial assets. Under capital account, 
there is only inflow and outflow of capital and the difference between the two 
represents a country's capital account 
balance.  
Balance of payments accounts is constructed using a double entry accounting 
principle such that total credits equal total debits. Showing each credit and debit 
entry independently will not ensure that total credits equal total debits. 
Autonomous transactions are the transactions, undertaken for their own 
transactions. Accommodating transactions are the counterpart entries that total 
credits equal total debits and will usually be the financial counterpart or means of 
payment for the original autonomous transaction. Current account transactions 
are all autonomous, capital movements are capital account transactions can be 
both autonomous and accommodating transactions.  
A deficit in BoP must be settled. A way to settle is by a transaction on the capital 
account. Contrary to the general perception, a current account deficit is not a sign 
of bad economic policy or bad economic conditions.  


--- Page 36 ---
 
 
 
170 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments BoP is one of the major indicators of a country's status in international trade. 
International managers can use the balance of payments to forecast economic 
conditions and, in some cases, the likelihood of economic crises. The accounts do 
not tell what is good or bad, nor do they tell what is causing what. But they show 
what is happening so one can reach one‟s conclusions.  
A deficit in BoP must be rectified by taking appropriate measures.  There are 
many methods, important among them are monetary and non-monetary measures.  
The non -monetary category includes trade policy for promoting exports and 
reducing imports.   Capital inflows and Fiscal policy measures. Monetary 
measures include expenditure-switching policies which work through changes in 
relative prices. An important form of expenditure switching policy is the 
reduction in the foreign exchange rate of the national currency, namely, 
devaluation. The objective of expenditure-reducing policy in the economy relates 
to the fall in aggregate expenditure which works to reduce imports. 
8.10 KEY WORDS 
Accommodating transaction One undertaken for the balance of payments 
purpose. 
Autonomous transaction One undertaken for its own sake.  
Balance of payment (BoP) This is a record of the value of all economic 
transactions of a country with the rest of the 
world for a particular year. It is the sum of 
current account and capital account 
transactions including the term of the 
official settlement.  
Balance of trade Refers to merchandise trade only i.e. 
receipts from exports less payment for 
imports of a country.  
BoP account Follows the double-entry bookkeeping 
method, which balances both the credit and 
debit sides. By this accounting method, th e 
BoP of a country is always in balance.  
Counterpart items Certain items in the balance of payments 
exist only as counterpart items, introduced 
to balance the inclusion of other items that 
do not  fall naturally into the double-entry 
system. The  allocation of Special Drawing 
Rights (SDRs) is an example of an artificial 
counterpart item introduced into the balance 
of payments to offset  the corresponding 
increase in SDRs holdings  within official 


--- Page 37 ---
 
 
 
171 
Components of 
Balance of Payments reserves (as SDRs are no one  sector‟s 
liabilities).  
Expenditure reduction policy Involves a reduction in aggregate demand 
in the domestic economy to improve the 
balance of payments position on the current 
account.  
Expenditure-switching policy Switches domestic and foreign demand 
away from foreign goods and towards 
ho
me-produced goods.  
Monetary movements The items making monetary movements are 
as follows:  miscellaneous capital, change 
in external liabilities and claims, change in 
the account with the I.M.F., and change in 
the gold and convertible currency reserves. 
Rupee debt service Interest payments on and principal 
repayments on account of civilian and non-
civilian debt in respect of Rupee Payment 
Area (RPA), are clubbed together and 
shown separately under this item. 
8.11  SOME USEFUL REFERENCES 
Acharyya, Rajat (2014): International Economics, Chapter 22, 1st edition, Oxford 
University Press, New Delhi  
Ball, Donald A, et, al, (2009): International Business: The Challenge of Global 
Competition, 11 th edition, Tata McGraw-Hill Publication Company Ltd., New 
Delhi  
Carbaugh, Robert J (2009): International Economics , 11 th editions, Cengage 
Learning Indian Pvt., Ltd., New Delhi  
Czinkota, Michael, et, al., (2008): International Business, 7 th editions, Cengage 
Learning Indian Pvt., Ltd., New Delhi  
Pugel, Thomas A (2008): International Economics, 13 th edition, Tata McGraw-
Hill Publication Company Ltd., New Delhi  
Roy, Shyamal (2010): Macroeconomic Policy Environment , 2 nd edition, Tata 
McGraw-Hill Publication Company Ltd., New Delhi  
Sodersten, Bo (1974): “ International Economics ”, Macmillan Press Ltd., 
London, UK. 


--- Page 38 ---
 
 
 
172 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments 8.12  ANSWERS/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES  
Check your progress 1 
1) See section 8.3 
2) See section 8.4.2 
3) See section 8.4.3 
4) See section 8.4.1 
5) See section 8.2 
Check your progress 2  
1) See section 8.5  
2) See section 8.5  
3) See section 8.5  
4) See section 8.5  
Check your progress 3 
1) See section 8.6  
2) See section 8.6  
3) See section 8.6  
4) See section 8.6  
Check your progress 4  
1) See section 8.7  
2) See section 8.7  
3) See section 8.8 
4) See section 8.8  
 
