--- Page 57 ---
 
 
 
191 
Approaches to 
Balance of  
Payments (BoP) UNIT 10  APPROACHES TO BALANCE OF 
PAYMENTS  
Structure 
10.0 Objectives 
10.1 Introduction 
10.2 Approaches to BoP 
10.2.1 Elasticity approach  
10.2.2 The absorption approach 
10.2.3 Keynesian Approach   
 10.2.4 The monetary approach   
10.2.4.1  Tenets of the monetary approach 
10.2.4.2  Monetary approach and fixed exchange rate 
10.2.4.3  Monetary approach and flexible exchange rate 
10.2.4.4 Criticisms of the monetary approach to the balance of 
payments 
10.2.5  Synthesising all the approaches  
10.3 Let us sum up  
10.4 Key Words 
10.5 Some Useful Books and References  
10.6 Answer/Hints to Check your Progress Exercises       
10.0  OBJECTIVES 
After studying this Unit, you should be able to:  
• identify different approaches to BoP; 
• explain the main ingredients of these approaches;  
• distinguish between monetary approach under fixed and flexible exchange 
rates; 
• point out the main criticisms levelled against the monetary approach; 
• make a synthesis of different approaches; and  
• highlight the importance of these approaches in making BoP policy. 
 
 Contributed by  Prof. S.K. Singh, Retd. Prof. IGNOU  


--- Page 58 ---
 
 
 
192 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments 10.1   INTRODUCTION 
Some of the problems which policymakers generally face while analyzing the 
balance of payments are related to the disequilibrium deficit or surplus and their 
causes. Disequilibrium in the balance of payments is a general economic 
phenomenon in most developing countries. In this context, it is important to 
know the role of a country's ce ntral bank and the policy options it has for 
maintaining equilibrium in the balance of payments. Many theories in the field of 
international economics explain the balance of payments disequilibrium and the 
movements of international reserves in one way or another. Mainly there are four 
approaches. In the elasticities and absorption approaches, the focus is on the trade 
balance with unemployed resources. These approaches are associated with 
Keynesian theory. The distinctive feature of the monetary approach t o the 
balance of payments is that it examines the implications for the stock equilibrium 
of the continuing flow of financial assets required to finance a continuing balance 
of payments surplus or deficit. A central proposition of the monetary approach to 
the BoP is that the balance of payments is a monetary phenomenon requiring 
analysis with the tools of monetary theory.  This unit reviews the major 
approaches to BoP adjustments.  
10.2  APPROACHES TO BoP 
The alternative approaches to BoP adjustment are explained in this section. These 
approaches are as under: 
i) The Elasticity Approach;  
ii) The Absorption Approach;  
iii) The Keynesian approach; and 
iv) The monetary approach.  
Let us discuss all the approaches one by one. 
10.2.1 Elasticity approach  
We begin first by considering the elasticity approach. The elasticities approach is 
based on the premise that relative prices determine exports and imports. In this 
way elasticities approach argues that the number of exports and imports will 
depend upon do mestic prices, foreign prices and the exchange rate. This 
approach applies the Marshallian analysis of elasticities of supply and demand 
for individual commodities to the analysis of exports and imports as a whole. It is 
generally assumed that exports depe nd on the price of exports, and imports 
depend on the price of imports. These relations are then translated into 
elasticities.  
 


--- Page 59 ---
 
 
 
193 
Approaches to 
Balance of  
Payments (BoP) 
The effect of devaluation on the trade balance depends on four elasticities:     
a) the foreign elasticity of demand for exports; 
b) the home elasticity of supply;  
c) the foreign elasticity of supply of imports; and 
d) the home elasticity of demand for imports.  
The immediate effect of devaluation is a change in relative prices. If a country 
devalues by, for example, 20 percent, it means tha t import prices increase by 20 
percent counted in home prices. An increase in import prices leads to a fall in the 
demand for imports. At the same time, import -competing industries will be in a 
better competitive situation. Exporters will receive 20 percen t more in the home 
currency for every unit of foreign currency they earn. They can, therefore, lower 
their prices counted in foreign currency and will become more competitive. How 
much they can expand sales abroad depends primarily on the foreign demand 
elasticities for their goods. 
The larger the elasticity, the greater the fall in the volume of imports. The value 
of the demand elasticity of imports depends, of course, on what types of goods 
the devaluing country imports. When the exporters, because of dev aluation 
receive more for every unit of foreign currency they earn, they can lower their 
prices quoted in foreign currency. When they lower their prices they should be 
able to sell more. How much the quantity exported increased depends on the 
demand elasticity confronting the country's exporters.  
The essence of the theory is embodied in the famous Marshall Lerner condition: 
an improvement in competitiveness will improve the balance of payments if and 
only if the sum of the price elasticities of demand for imports by residents and 
exports by non -residents exceeds unity.  The crucial feature of the condition is 
that it is the  sum of the elasticities which must exceed one, not each elasticity 
separately. Hence both exports and imports can be price inelastic but for the 
condition to be satisfied. In effect, the exchange rate clears the balance of 
payments. A criterion for a change of the balance of trade in the desired direction 
can be established, assuming that export and import prices adjust to equate the 
demand for and supply of exports and imports. 
The effect on the price level depends primarily on the economic policy 
accompanying devaluation. The inflationary impact could be limited if a tight 
monetary and fiscal policy is pursued jointly with devaluation. Another 
consideration to take into account is the effect of devaluation on income 
distribution. Again devaluation should result in a reallocation of resources away 
from the sector producing non -traded goods and into exports and import -
competing sectors. In general, we can say that the factors of production employed 
in the export and import-competing sectors will benefit from devaluation. 


--- Page 60 ---
 
 
 
194 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments The Marshall-Lerner condition is built on some drastic simplifications. It roughly 
assumes that the supply elasticities are large and that the trade balance is in 
equilibrium when devaluation takes place. The sort of mechanism ignored by 
Marshall-Lerner includes such processes as:  
i) a change in relative prices increases exports; 
ii) the increase in exports generates an increase in income; 
iii) the higher level of income leads to more imports.  
This latter increase in imports can be such that there is no improvement in the 
balance of payments despite the rise in exports. However, none of these 
assumptions invalidates the spirit of the Marshall-Learner condition, which says 
that the larger the res pective demand elasticities, the more favourable the effect 
of devaluation on the trade balance. So long as the sum of elasticities exceeds 
unity, then an improvement in competitiveness will improve the balance of 
payments i.e., the Marshall Lerner condition.  
The significance of Marshall -Lerner condition : Opinion is divided about the 
relevance of Marshall-Lerner, or competitiveness, to the balance of payments. On 
the one hand, some economists believe that competitiveness is a major 
determinant of the balance of payments. On the other hand, according to Johnson 
“it should be emphasized that the analysis of the effects of devaluation is 
completely independent of any critical magnitude condition applying to the 
elasticities of international demand. The relevan t stability condition is monetary 
theoretic. The familiar elasticity condition (sum -of-the-elasticities-of demand –
greater-than-unity) is completely irrelevant”.  
However, it should be noted that the elasticities approach in general can be 
relevant to the analysis of inflation and unemployment. The income effect, whose 
size does depend in part on Marshall-Lerner analysis, is not an unwelcome by -
product but the objec t of the policy. Similarly, exogenous change in 
competitiveness e.g. by income policy, as a means to reduce unemployment is 
important in policymaking. The major flaw with the elasticities approach is that it 
only looked at the current account balance, not the overall balance of payments. 
10.2.2 The Absorption Approach  
Sydney Alexander of the IMF first presented the absorption approach in 1952. He 
sought to look at the balance of trade from the point of view of national income 
accounting: 
Y = domestic production of goods and services 
E = domestic absorption of goods and services, or domestic total expenditure 
BT = balance of trade 
BT = Y - E  


--- Page 61 ---
 
 
 
195 
Approaches to 
Balance of  
Payments (BoP) 
The above identity is useful in pointing out that an improvement in the balance of 
trade calls for an i ncrease in production relative to absorption. The absorption 
approach can be said to work only in the presence of unemployed resources. This 
approach argued that questions regarding the effects of changes in economic 
variables on the balance of payments we re best assessed by ascertaining the 
effects on output and absorption. It concentrates on the relationships between real 
expenditure and real income and the relationships between these price levels. 
Absorption here is the name given to the aggregate of dom estic demand (C + I  + 
G), which is the number of goods and services taken off the market domestically. 
To Alexander, the foreign balance ‘ B’ is the difference between the total output 
of goods and services ‘ Y’ and the total absorption ‘ A’ of these goods and 
services by the home economy. Thus, B =Y–A. 
If the total output is larger than the total expenditure, the country will have a 
surplus in its BoP and if the total expenditure is larger than the total output the 
country will have a deficit, and if output equals expenditure, the BoP will be in 
equilibrium. If a country has a deficit it can, in principle, close the deficit in one 
of two ways; by reducing expenditure or by increasing output. It is often difficult 
to increase output in the short run esp ecially if the country already has full 
employment. Therefore, the chief means for reducing a deficit is usually an 
expenditure-reducing or switching policy. A tighter monetary policy and fiscal 
policy can be viewed as an efficient means of implementing an  expenditure-
reducing policy. If the country has a deficit in the BoP, it can pursue a tighter 
monetary and fiscal policy. Therewill be a deflationary effect on the national 
income and lead to a fall in imports, or at last act as a brake on the increase in  
imports. It will also have a positive effect on exports and import -competing 
industries. 
The criticisms against the absorption approach: The following are some of the 
weaknesses of this approach:  
i) Machlup has observed that certain elasticity consideration s in the model had 
been ignored. Alexander had seen these situations in terms of different supply 
and demand conditions for commodities, which necessarily involved 
elasticities. However, Alexander’s analysis played down the role of elasticity 
in his model.   
ii) The estimation required to bring the ab sorption approach up to the 
'operational' level was just as formidable as those involved in the elasticities 
approach. In the case of the absorption approach the relevant propensities had 
to be known before it was possible to say whether devaluation would be 
beneficial to the trade balance. 
iii) It was necessary to embody within the model the fact that an improvement in 
the balance of trade of a devaluing country involved opposite changes in the 
trade balance of the rest of the world.  


--- Page 62 ---
 
 
 
196 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments iv) This approach suffered fro m the difficulty that it was not suited for 
examining changes that only indirectly affected output and absorption: 
changes such as devaluation or inflation.  
v) An important flaw and one shared with the elasticities approach is that it only 
looked at the curr ent account balance and not at the overall balance of 
payments. 
The result of these criticisms of the absorption approach was a reformulation 
which included elasticity effects and was more nearly a synthesis of the elasticity 
and the income approaches. It is important to realise how neatly the absorption 
model complements the elasticities approach. The traditional approach ignored 
supply-side effects and income effects. The absorption approach looks only at 
these two effects. The two approaches can be combi ned. In brief, the absorption 
approach focuses on the key factors omitted from the traditional approach and 
provides a general framework of analysis. Its single most virtue stems from its 
very existence, the idea that the balance of payments is a macroecon omic 
variable.  
10.2.3 Keynesian Approach  
The Keynesian balance of payments analysis is a coherent presentation of the 
macroeconomic case for import controls and devaluation. The Keynesian balance 
of payments theory was the absorption model of Alexander, of the IMF, in the 
early 1950s. As in all Keynesian models, the balance of payments on the current 
account, is analysed as a macroeconomic phenomenon in the goods market. The 
current balanc e of payments will necessarily equal the difference between 
aggregate domestic output and aggregate domestic expenditure (with a surplus if 
the output is large and vice versa). This conclusion follows from a manipulation 
of the basic national income; output ‘O’ and expenditure ‘E’, where O=E.  
Although the part played by income changes in BoP adjustment is Keynesian in 
approach and method, Keynes himself took no direct part in its formulation or 
development. The Keynesian approach made possible the formulat ion of a new 
approach to the adjustment process by Mrs Joan Robinson, R.F. Harrod, Fritz 
Machlup and others . This new approach showed that an imbalance in BoP 
involved an adjustment in income, employment and output irrespective of what 
changes took place i n prices and of how the deficit was financed. It showed an 
interaction between the BoP and national income which was a dual one: the 
‘adjustment process’, by which a BoP is adjusted by changes in the income levels 
of the home country and the rest of the wo rld; and the ‘ transmission process ’, 
which shows how variations in the national income of one country may through 
their balances of payments cause variations in the national incomes of other 
countries. 
 


--- Page 63 ---
 
 
 
197 
Approaches to 
Balance of  
Payments (BoP) 
Thus, with the development of the income approach to BoP adjustment, a 
marriage was effected between the theory of International trade and business 
cycle theory from which much could be expected. It explains not only the 
adjustment process but also the transmission process. It shows that since deficits 
are adjustable by relative movements of national income, by reduction of income 
in the deficit country and increase of income in the surplus country, correction of 
a deficit must under static productivity conditions, necessarily involve a 
reduction in national income. The full condition of equilibrium for a country was 
now redefined as one in which total external receipts equalled total external 
payments at full employment. This linkage of external equilibrium for a country 
with its level of income and employmen t by the new approach enabled a much 
clearer and most realistic view to be taken of BoP policy in modern times.  
Check Your Progress 1 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  What is meant by the Marshall-Lerner condition? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Explain the main features of the absorption approach. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) The main merit of the Keynesian approach lies in integrating national income 
with BoP.  
 …………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
4) What are the distinctive features of elasticity, absorption, and the Keynesian 
approach to BoP? 
 …………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
5) How do these three approaches differ?  
 …………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 


--- Page 64 ---
 
 
 
198 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments 10.2.4 The Monetary Approach  
In this section, we examine the monetary approach to the balance of payments.  
Evolution of monetary approach: Alan Barrett is of the view that some 
controversy surrounds the early origins of the monetary approach to BoP. 
Essentially the controversy is over whether David Hume or Richard Cantillon is 
the true forefather of the approach. Ludwig von Mises can be considered a 
forerunner of the monetary approach because he analysed the causes and cures of 
a persistent balance-of-payments disequilibrium. Mises's contribution to balance-
of-payments analysis should be hailed as a doctrinal milestone in the 
development of the monetary approach and, much more importantly, as a shining 
exemplar of methodological individualism in monetary theory.  
The monetary approach was developed in the 1950s and 1960s by the 
International Monetary Fund’s research department under Jacques J. Polak, and 
by Harry G. Johnson, Robert A. Mundell, and their students at the University of 
Chicago and became fully developed during the 1970s. The monetary approach 
represents an extension of domestic monetarism (stemming from the Chicago 
school) to the international economy in that it views the balance of payments as 
an essentially monetary phenomenon. That is, money plays a crucial role in 
payments.  
Mundell included the capital account of BoP in the discussion, and incorporated 
two policy instruments. One was the growing reluctance of countries to use 
devaluation as a policy instrument, and the other was the growing constraints on 
the use of trade barriers arising from G.A.T.T negotiations. While it was also 
Mundell who recognized that, in a model of capital mobility, the central bank 
controls not the money supply and employment but domestic credit and the 
balance of payments, Harry Johnson popularized the concept of the 
fundamentally monetary nature of the balance of payments. Jacques Polak’s 
approach to monetary management in the context of the balance of payments 
disequilibrium evolved in the 1950s in work concerned with Latin American 
economies. The monetary approach to the balance of payments is an extension of 
closed economy monetary theory, stressing the stability of the demand for money 
function and considering the channels through which changes in the money 
supply, out of line with changes in money demand, affect the economy.  
10.2.4.1 Tenets of monetary approach  
To start with let us understand the basic assumptions of this approach which are 
as under: 
i) Assumes flexible exchange rates. In other words, the currencies in question 
are traded in foreign exchange markets with minimal or no government 
intervention. 
ii) It focuses exclusively on the behaviour of international investors trying to 
decide between securities denominated in two different currencies. Based on 


--- Page 65 ---
 
 
 
199 
Approaches to 
Balance of  
Payments (BoP) 
this the monetary approach is also called the asset approach to exchange rate 
determination. 
iii) The approach emphasizes the relevance of the changes in monetary policy 
and the resulting changes in real returns on securities denominated in 
different currencies. After investors observe these changes in real returns, 
they express their preference for security, which leads to buying or selling 
certain currencies and, therefore, changes in the exchange rate. 
iv) The demand for money is a stock demand and is a stable function of income, 
prices, wealth and interest rate. 
v) The supply of money is a multiple of the monetary base, including domestic 
credit and the country’s foreign exchange reserves. 
vi) The demand for nominal money balances is a positive function of nominal 
income. 
Given these assumptions, the BoP is regarded as a monetary phenomenon. The 
very concept of a BoP implies the existence of money. The proponents of the 
monetary approach regard the balance of payments as being fundamentally a 
monetary phenomenon. An analysis which does not place money at the centre of 
attention is seen as inferior. For them, the attraction of the monetary approach is 
that it analyses the relationships directly relevant to the money account and not in 
terms of other behavioural relationships which are only indirectly relevant to the 
money account. Considerations of this relationship can lead us to the conclusion 
of the monetary approach to explaining the relationship among monetary policy, 
domestic credit policy, and the flow of international reserves in the context of 
BoP. Most components of the balance of payments are directly or indirectly 
affected by a country's domestic credit and monetary policy. The importance of 
monetary policy is to restore equilibrium in the money market. Some of the 
macro-variables such as nominal interest rate, GDP and inflation are affected by 
contractionary/expansionary monetary policy. And, thus, it has a significant 
effect on domestic credit as well as the balance of payments of a country. 
This is based on the simple idea that the balance of payment surplus or deficit is 
caused by disequilibrium in the money market. A BoP deficit or surplus 
represents a transient stock-adjustment process evoked by an initial inequality 
between actual and desired money stocks. The monetary approach to the BoP 
assumes fixed exchange rates. Whenever the economy has disequilibrium in the 
money market, it will result in a payments imbalance but this disequilibrium will 
be self-correcting through time and there is no need for correcting the 
disequilibrium through policy adjustments. The main reason for the self-
correcting mechanism is that the stable demand function for money relates to 
money as a stock, not as a flow. When the desired stock is reached, the inflow or 
outflow of foreign funds stops and so does the balance of payment surplus or 
deficit. According to Johnson, the central point of the monetary approach to BoP 


--- Page 66 ---
 
 
 
200 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments is that balance-of-payments deficits or surpluses reflect stock disequilibrium 
between demand and supply in the market for the money.  
Although real factors are not excluded, the demands for the supply of money are 
the central theoretical relationships used in the analysis of the balance of 
payments. An increase in domestic credit raises money supply relative to money 
demand, other things being equal. So the balance of payments must go into 
deficit to reduce the money supply and restore money market equilibrium. This 
approach is an explanation of the overall balance of payments. It explains 
changes in the balance of payments in terms of the demand for and supply of 
money. According to this approach, a balance of payments deficit is always and 
everywhere a monetary phenomenon. Therefore, it can only be corrected by 
monetary measures. 
10.2.4.2 Monetary approach and fixed exchange rate 
The monetary approach implies that a country has no control over its money 
supply under fixed exchange rates. The money supply is endogenous rather than 
exogenous or a policy variable. The pursuit of any domestic objective, such as 
price stability, by altering the domestic component of the monetary base will be 
frustrated by offsetting changes in the international component through reserve 
flows. If a country cannot pursue sterilization policies, all the government can do 
is control the composition of the money supply, not it's level. This implies that 
under the situation the government cannot determine the level of the monetary 
base and hence money supply, but only the division of the base into its domestic 
component, consisting of domestic credit created by the monetary authorities and 
foreign components, that is, international reserves. 
The money demand is defined as positively related to the nations’ nominal 
national income and is assumed to be a stable function in the long run.  On the 
other end of establishing equilibrium in the money market lies the money supply 
in an economy which is to a large extent given by the monetary authorities of the 
nation exogenously. The monetary equilibrium condition requires maintaining 
stability in the money market.  
If the disequilibrium results from the inflow of foreign nations’ currency it is 
equivalent to having a balance of payment surplus whereby inflow outturns the 
outflow of nations' currency abroad. Suppose the increased money demand is not 
satisfied by the monetary authorities through a rise in the domestic component of 
the money supply. In that case, the foreign exchange component shall increase 
creating an imbalance in the external account of the nation. Similarly, suppose 
the disequilibrium in the money market exists in the form of a higher money 
supply or a shortage in money demand. In that case, the foreign component of the 
monetary base flows out of the nation thereby creating a deficit in the nation's 
balance of payments account. Thus a surplus in the balance of payments accounts 
results from an excess in the stock of money demand, which is not satisfied by 
the rise in domestic components of the nation's monetary base, and BoP deficit 
