--- Page 21 ---
 
 
 
155 
Components of 
Balance of Payments UNIT 8  COMPONENTS OF BALANCE OF PA YMENTS  
Structure 
8.0  Objectives 
8.1 Introduction 
8.2 Importance of balance of payments (BoP) for a country 
8.3 Concept of BoP 
8.4 Some related concepts 
8.4.1  Balance of trade and Balance of payments   
8.4.2  Autonomous and accommodating transactions  
8.4.3  Balance of payments always balances  
8.5 Components of BoP  
8.6 BoP Accounting: An example of India‟s BoP 
8.7 Nature and implications of disequilibrium  
8.8 Policy measures for correcting disequilibrium  
8.9 Let us sum up  
8.10 Key Words 
8.11 Some Useful Books 
8.12 Answer/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises     
8.0  OBJECTIVES 
After studying this Unit, you should be able to:  
 appreciate the importance of the balance of payments (BoP) for a country; 
 explain the concepts related to BoP; 
 distinguish between: 
i) balance of trade and balance of payments;   
ii) current and capital account of BoP;  
iii) autonomous and accommodating transactions of BoP; 
 describe the components of the current and capital account of BoP; 
 highlight the significance of autonomous and accommodating items; 
 discuss the nature and implications of  disequilibrium in the form of „ surplus‟ 
and „deficit‟ of BoP; and 
 examine the policy measures required for removing disequilibrium in BoP. 
                                                 
 Contributed by  Prof. S.K. Singh, Retd. Prof. IGNOU  


--- Page 22 ---
 
 
 
156 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments 8.1   INTRODUCTION 
This unit examines the framework used to summarize a country‟s international 
transactions. The scorecard is the balance of payments, the set of accounts 
recording all flows of value between a nation‟s residents and the rest of the world 
during a period of time. The balance of payments shows a wealth of information 
about a country‟s international economic transactions. An international 
transaction is an exchange of goods, services, or assets between residents of one 
country and those of another. It is also a key to understanding how people trade 
one country‟s money for that of another country. In addition, the exchanges 
documented in the balance of payments have major implications for 
macroeconomic concerns like growth, inflation and unemployment. Trends in the 
balance of payments as a whole, including trade, need to be analyzed to assess 
the interactions and inter-relations between an economy's domestic and external 
sectors.
  
8.2  IMPORTANCE OF BALANCE OF PAYMENTS 
(BoP) FOR A COUNTRY 
BoP is one way to measure a country‟s international economic situation.  It 
indicates a country's status in international trade. Persistent disequilibrium in the 
balance of payments, particularly the deficit balance, is undesirable because it (a) 
weakens the country's economic position at the international level, and (b) affects 
the economy's progress adversely. BoP accounting highlights a country's 
competitive strengths and weaknesses and helps achieve balanced economic 
growth. It can significantly affect a government's economic policies and the 
economy itself. Capital receipts and payments indicate the country‟s external 
debt position and changes in it.  BoP data are of interest because they reveal 
demand for the country‟s currency and  BoP trend helps to predict what sort of 
economic environment may develop in the country.  
The transaction to floating exchange rate regimes in the 1970s changed the focus 
from the total BoP to its various subaccounts like the Current and Financial 
Account balances. These are the indicators of economic activities and currency 
repercussions to come. The balance of payments can be used to forecast 
economic conditions and, in some cases, the likelihood of an economic crisis. 
International crises have occurred for as long as there have been international 
trade and commerce. And they will occur again. Each crisis has its unique 
characteristics, but all follow some of the economic fundamentals.  
8.3  CONCEPT OF BoP 
The balance of payments of a country is a systematic record of all economic 
transactions during the period between residents of the reporting country and 
residents of other countries.  It is a summary of the monetary value of all 
exchanges and transfers of goods, services and evidence of debt or ownership –
 


--- Page 23 ---
 
 
 
157 
Components of 
Balance of Payments suitably classified and aggregated between the residents, businesses and 
government and other institutions of one country and the rest of the world for a 
given period of time, usually a year. Exports and imports of goods and services, 
and all the other items, are flow items. That has all dimensions of an amount per 
day, month, year, or whatever the period in question may be. The International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) has developed a standardized BoP system and form of 
presentation. All transactions entering the balance of payments can be grouped 
into three broad accounts within the balance of payments: 
i) the current account  -   records transactions in goods and services and  
transfer payments; 
ii) the capital account  - represents a change in a country‟s foreign 
assets and liabilities; and 
iii) the official international - records transactions in monetary gold and other 
reserve account         reserve assets (notably convertible currencies, 
the country‟s „reserve tranche‟ at the IMF and 
SDRs. 
The BoP is often misunderstood because many people believe it to be a balance 
sheet, rather than a cash flow statement. By recording all international 
transactions over a period of time, it is tracking the continuing flow of purchases 
and payments between a country and all other countries. It does not add up the 
value of all assets and liabilities of a country like a balance sheet does for an 
individual firm.  In short, BoP means:  
i) record of all international economic transactions;  
ii) the type of economic transactions that dominate are real assets, financial 
assets, and services;  
iii) it is not a balance sheet; 
iv) it is a flow statement; and  
v) during a period of time, usually one year. 
In a tabular form structure of BoP transactions may be presented as under:   
Balance of payments 
 
 
Current Account          
Capital Account  
     
 
 
 
Exports (X)   Remittances and  Asset Transactions, FDI, 
Imports (M)   Transfers Receipts 
     External Borrowings  
    and Payments  
(Balance of Trade 
= X – M).  


--- Page 24 ---
 
 
 
158 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments 8.4  SOME RELATED CONCEPTS 
For the sake of clarity in understanding, three important concepts are explained in 
this section. They are: (i) the distinction between the balance of trade and the 
balance of payments, (ii) autonomous and accommodating transactions, and (iii) 
the balance of payments always balances.  
8.4.1 Balance of Trade and Balance of Payments  
A marked distinction exists between the concepts of balance of trade and balance 
of payments. BoP transactions take the form of trade in goods and services, 
capital movements or financial flows. These three forms of transaction give rise 
to a compartmentalization of the balance of payments accounts. Balance of trade 
refers to the visible items only. Import or export of goods is a visible item 
because it is an open trade among the countries and can be easily certified „by the 
customs officials ‟.
 The net receipts from exports and imports of merchandise 
constitute the balance of trade (BoT). A trade deficit for a country arises in a 
particular year if the value of its exports is smaller than the value of its imports. 
The balance of trade need not always balance. The important point to remember 
is that there may be a balance of trade deficit and still a balance of payment 
surplus or vice versa. In other words, a trade deficit does not necessarily imply 
that the country is losing reserves, etc.; long-term movements account for the 
difference.  
The merchandise trade is only a portion of the thousands of different 
international transactions that occur in the country each year. It is the official 
term for net exports that makes up the balance of payments. It is just one part of 
the balance of payments. The official balance of trade is separated into the 
balance of merchandise trade for tangible goods and the balance of services. BoP 
is more comprehensive than the balance of trade. Balance of payments includes 
apart from the balance of trade or merchandise account, the invisible account 
which is again composed of the services sector and the gifts and charities account 
comprising a variety of invisible items, plus a record of the capital account. Thus, 
the balance of trade is only a partial study of the balance of payments. However, 
the balance of trade is nothing but a major component of the balance of 
payments. In short, the balance of trade is a partial picture, while the balance of 
payments is a complete picture of the country's international economic relations. 
Further, in the accounting sense, the balance of trade may be a deficit or surplus. 
It may, thus, be imbalanced. But the balance of payments as a whole must always 
balance. For that reason, there is an item like "Errors and Omissions" in its 
structure. 


--- Page 25 ---
 
 
 
159 
Components of 
Balance of Payments 8.4.2 Autonomous and accommodating transactions 
A double-entry accounting principle leads to the distinction generally made 
between underlying, originating or „ autonomous‟ transactions, and those which 
are merely the financial counterparts or the „ accommodating‟ transaction. This 
distinction is usually attributed to James Edward Meade. Autonomous 
transactions such as trade flows, direct investment, and portfolio investment are 
independent of other items and not restricted by the size of other balance of 
payments transactions. These items are also called above-the-line items in BoP 
accounts.  Autonomous transactions are undertaken solely to make international 
trade possible. „Autonomous‟ refers to transactions undertaken spontaneously for 
their own sake.  
Accommodating transactions depend on the other items and should be shown as 
identically equal to the autonomous transaction such that total credits equal total 
debits. Accommodating items reflect government actions aimed at altering the 
size and the composition of the balance of payments, and they are sometimes 
referred to as below-the-line items . Representing each entry independently will 
not guarantee equality between credits and debits. As such, it is important to 
identify the counterpart entries or „ accommodating‟ items to ensure total credits 
equal total debits. It should be clear that net autonomous transactions are 
counterbalanced by equivalent net accommodating transactions. A balance of 
payments surplus or deficit refers only to autonomous transactions.   
8.4.3 Balance of payments always balances 
The balance of payments is strictly an accounting term used to describe  a record 
of all of the transactions between one country and the rest of the world. A 
balance of payments problem is, accordingly, a problem about how the balance 
of payments balances . In practice, it is difficult to achieve where receipts equal 
payments. In reality, total receipts may diverge from total payments because of: 
 
i) the difficulty of collecting accurate trade information;  
ii) the difference in the timing between the two sides of the balance; and 
iii) a change in the exchange rates. 
To say that the „ balance of payments always balances ' is to say that a net credit 
balance in one of these accounts must have a counterpart net debit balance in one 
of the other accounts.  The algebraic sum of the three accounts' net credit and 
debit balances must equal zero.  Thus, a net credit balance on the current account 
of say, (+) Rs. 100 crores, may have a counterpart net debit balance on the capital 
account of say (-) Rs.100 crores (that is, an outflow of capital), a net inflow of 
gold by Rs.100 crores or a combination of capital outflow and gold inflow equal 
to the Rs. 100 crores surplus on the current account. It simply results from the 
double-entry book-keeping procedure which is used to record the transactions.   


--- Page 26 ---
 
 
 
160 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments Because of measurement problems, recourse is made to „ balancing item ' that 
intends to eliminate measurement errors. The purpose of incorporating this item 
in the BoP account is to adjust the difference between the sums of the credit and 
the sums of the debit items in the BoP accounts so that they add up to zero by 
construction. Hence the proposition: ' the BoP always balances '. It is a truism. It 
only suggests that the two sides of the accounts must always show the same total. 
It implies only equality. In this bookkeeping sense, BoP always balances. 
„Balance of payments always balances’ 
has no economic significance.  
Check Your Progress 1 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Define the balance of payments. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Distinguish between autonomous and accommodating transactions in the 
balance of payments. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Why must a country‟s balance of payments always be balanced in theory?  
 …………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
4) How does the balance of payments differ from the balance of trade?  
 …………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
5) Highlight the importance of BoP for an economy.  
 …………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
8.5 COMPONENTS OF BoP 
There are a wide variety of accounts that determine the BoP, but for purposes of 
analysis, they can be grouped into three broad categories:  current account items, 
capital account items, and reserves.  


--- Page 27 ---
 
 
 
161 
Components of 
Balance of Payments Current account 
The current account consists of merchandise trade, services , and unrequited 
transfers.  Merchandise trade is typically the first part of the current account.  It 
receives more attention than any of the other accounts because this is where the 
imports and exports of goods are reported , and these are often the largest single 
component of all international transactions.  Merchandise trade transactions can 
affect a country's BoP in several ways .  The transactions in the current account 
affect national income and, in terms of income analysis, the level of output and 
employment. 
The second type of transaction in the current account is a payment (or receipts) 
for which there are no corresponding receipts (or payments). These are called 
unrequited payments and receipts. These transactions are unilateral transfers. The 
net receipts from these transactions and the transactions in the trading account 
constitute the balance of the current account. Thus, positive net receipts imply a 
current account surplus and negative net receipts-payments exceeding receipts 
imply a current account deficit.  
Services 
The services category includes many payments such as freight, banking and 
insurance on international shipments; tourist travel; profits and income from 
overseas investment; personal expenditures by government, civilians, and 
military personnel overseas; and payments for management fees, royalties, film 
rental, and construction services. Purchases of these services are recorded as 
debits, while sales of these services are similar to exports and are recorded as 
credits. 
 
The balance of the current account, is a larger concept than the balance of trade, 
as it includes the balance of trade, the balance of services, and the balance of 
unrequited transfers. The balance of the current account need not be equal but 
can show a surplus or a deficit. The balance of the current account is a very 
important concept, as it shows the flow aspect of a country's international 
transactions.  
Capital account 
The capital account records all international purchases and sales of assets such as 
money, stocks, bonds, etc. Capital account items are  transactions that involve 
claims in ownership.  It shows the net change in foreign -asset ownership of a 
nation. Direct investment  involves managerial participation in a foreign 
enterprise and some control. A portfolio investment  is an investment designed t o 
obtain income or capital gains. Transactions in the capital account affect the 
country's international debtor or creditor position and the distribution of wealth 
and debt. Capital account transactions give rise to future claims such as acquiring 
foreign assets or shares in companies located abroad.  


--- Page 28 ---
 
 
 
162 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments The capital account consists of the  reserve account (the net change of foreign 
exchange of a nation's central bank in market operations),  loans and 
investments made by the nation (excluding the future interest  payments and 
dividends yielded by loans and investments). If net foreign exchange is negative, 
the capital account is said to be in deficit. The capital account transactions are 
difficult to measure. The capital and financial accounts could run a large en ough 
surplus to offset a trade deficit.  
Reserves or monetary movements 
This refers to a record of the transaction with the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) and foreign exchange reserve that mainly consists of holding gold and 
foreign currency assets. Drawings (treated as a kind of borrowing) from the IMF 
is a credit items, whereas repayments made to IMF are debit items. Drawing 
down of reserve, which is an inflow into the balance of payments from the 
reserve account, is a credit item. Like any other inflow, these reserves can be 
used to support a deficit elsewhere in the balance of payments. Similarly, 
additions to the reserve account are an outflow from the balance of payments to 
the reserve account and are, therefore, a debit item. Reserves are used for 
bringing BoP accounts into balance. When all the components of the balance of 
payments are taken together, the balance of payments should be in balance. 
Credits should equal debits.  
Balancing item of BoP 
Given that millions of rupees in transactions are reported in BoP statements, it 
should come as no surprise that the number of recorded debits is never equal to 
the number of credits. This is why there is an entry for net errors and omissions 
in the reserve account.  Net errors and omissions reflect the imbalances resulting 
from imperfections in source data and compilation of the balance of payments 
accounts. This is also known as a balancing item. 
Check Your Progress 2 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Explain the components of BoP. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) What are merchandise trade and service trade? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
