--- Page 1 ---
 
 
 
135 
Exchange Rate 
Regimes  
 
 
BLOCK 4 
 
 
EXCHANGE RATE AND  
BALANCE OF PAYMENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Unit 7 Exchange Rate Regimes    
Unit 8 Components of Balance of Payments 
Unit 9 Impossible Trinity: Alternative Scenarios 
Unit 10 Approaches to Balance of Payments 


--- Page 2 ---
 
 
 
136 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments BLOCK INTRODUCTION 
This block comprises of four units. 
Unit 7: Exchange Rate Regimes  deliberates on the concepts of foreign exchange, exchange 
rate, and exchange rate regimes. It distinguishes between different forms of exchange rate 
regimes: fixed, floating, and managed float along with their advantages and disadvantages. 
To delve deeper into the various exchange rate regimes, the unit traces briefly the historical 
development of international exchange rate regimes and examine operational aspects of the 
current exchange rate regimes. It also provides an overview of India’s current exchang e rate 
regime. 
Unit 8: Components of Balance of Payments  examines the framework used to summarize a 
country’s international transactions: Balance of Payments (BOP). While explaining the 
concept of BOP, the Unit describes the components of the current and capital account of BOP 
and highlights the significance of autonomous and accommodating items. The unit also 
provides comparison between BOP and BOT, current and capital account of BOP and 
autonomous and accommodating transactions of BoP. The Unit also throws light on nature 
and implications of BOP disequilibrium. Along with discussing the issues associated with 
BOP disequilibrium, this Unit also suggests policy measures for correcting disequilibrium.  
Unit 9: Impossible Trinity: Alternative Scenarios  elucidates Macroeconomic policy 
trilemma, also called the impossible trinity. It explains the components of the impossible 
trinity: free capital mobility, exchange-rate management and an independent monetary policy 
and examines the impossibility of achieving all three components simultaneously. The unit 
also digs deeper into impossible trinity by analysing the empirical evidence. It also points out 
the problem of rupee convertibility in meeting the conditions of the impossible trinity.  
Unit 10: Approaches to Balance of Payments  (BoP) throws light on various approaches to 
BOP adjustment: The Elasticity Approach, the Absorption Approach, the Keynesian 
approach; and the monetary approach. The unit delves deeper by explaining these approaches 
and highlighting their importance in making BOP policy.   
 
 
 
 
 
  


--- Page 3 ---
 
 
 
137 
Exchange Rate 
Regimes UNIT 7  EXCHANGE RATE REGIMES  
Structure 
7.0 Objectives 
7.1 Introduction 
7.2 Concepts  
7.3 Importance of foreign exchange for the economy 
7.4  Evolution of international exchange rate regimes 
 7.4.1  The Pre-World War I (WWI) financial order (1870 –1914) 
 7.4.2  Between the World Wars (1919 –1939) 
 7.4.3  The Bretton Woods Era (1945 –1971) 
 7.4.4  The post-Bretton Woods system (1971 –present) 
 7. 5  Forms of Exchange rate regime  
 7.5.1  Fixed exchange rate 
 7.5.2 Float ing exchange rate 
 7.5.3 Managed floating 
 7.5.4  Recurrence of instability suggests a new regime  
7.6
 India’s exchange rate regime 
7.7    Let us sum up  
7.8    Key Words 
7.9    Some Useful References 
7.10   Answer/Hints to Check your Progress Exercises     
7.0  OBJECTIVES 
After studying this Unit, you should be able to:  
 explain the concepts of: 
foreign exchange,  
exchange rate, and exchange rate regimes;  
 distinguish between different forms of exchange rate regimes;  
 discuss the advantages and disadvantages of: fixed, floating, and managed 
float; 
 trace briefly the historical development of international exchange rate 
regimes; 

 examine operational aspects of the current exchange rate regimes; and 
 provide an overview of India’s exchange rate regime. 
                                                 
 Contributed by  Prof. S.K. Singh, Retd. Prof. IGNOU  


--- Page 4 ---
 
 
 
138 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments 7.1   INTRODUCTION 
The exchange rate regime greatly impacts world trade and financial flows. The 
volume of such transactions and the speed at which they are growing highlight 
the crucial role of the exchange rate in today’s world, thereby making the 
exchange rate regime a central piece of any national economic policy framework. 
The choice of an appropriate exchange rate regime —
floating, managed or fixed 
arrangements—for individual countries is important. After all, an exchange rate 
regime that looks soft to one observer may look hard to another —which reflects, 
among other things, a lack of information among different players about foreign 
exchange markets and purchases or sales of foreign exchange by central banks. 
Which exchange rate regime and associated policies are appropriate for a country 
depending on its circumstances? No country can afford to be entirely indifferent 
to the behaviour of its exchange rate as it is closely related to the country's 
monetary policy, with both depending on common factors of influence and 
impact. In this unit, we discuss various aspects of the foreign exchange regime.
  
7.2  CONCEPTS 
It is important to understand terms such as ‘foreign exchange’, ‘exchange rate’, 
and ‘exchange rate regime’ as they are central to understanding the economy 
around. 
Foreign Exchange : ‘Foreign exchange’ refers to money denominated in a 
currency other than the domestic currency.  Foreign exchange can be cash, funds 
available on credit cards and debit cards, and bank deposits. 
Exchange rate : The rate at which a currency of one country exchanges for 
another country's currency is called the ‘ exchange rate'. The exchange rate can 
either be expressed in terms of the number of units of domestic currency per unit 
of foreign currency (direct quotation) as in the case of most currencies such as 
the Indian rupee. For example, if the exchange rate between the rupee and the US 
dollar (USD) is  quoted as Rs.65, this means that Rs.65 is required to purchase 
US$1.00.  Or the number of units of foreign currency per unit of domestic 
currency (indirect quotation) as in the case of some major trading currencies such 
as the pound sterling and the Australian dollar. When the value of the domestic 
currency increases in terms of another currency, it is referred to as a nominal 
appreciation of the domestic currency. In contrast, a decrease in the value of the 
domestic currency in terms of a foreign currency is known as nomina l 
depreciation.  
Exchange rate regime : An exchange rate regime is the process by which a 
country manages its currency with respect to foreign currencies. Exchange rate 
regimes can broadly be categorized into  two extremes: fixed and floating. 
Between these, there are several combinations of the two.  The exchange rate 
system refers
 to the arrangement for the movement of the exchange rate. 
Countries in the world operate under different exchange rate regimes.  


--- Page 5 ---
 
 
 
139 
Exchange Rate 
Regimes 7.3  IMPORTANCE OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE FOR 
THE ECONOMY 
The exchange rate is a key financial variable that affects decisions made by 
foreign exchange investors, exporters, importers, bankers, businesses, financial 
institutions, policymakers and tourists in the developed and developing world. 
Exchange rate fluctuations affect the value of international investment portfolios, 
the competitiveness of exports and imports, the value of international reserves, 
the currency value of debt payments, and the cost to tourists in terms of the value 
of their currency. Thus, exchange rate movements have important implications 
for the economy's business cycle, trade and capital flows and are therefore crucial 
for understanding financial developments and changes in economic policy. 
The exchange rate performs the same function as other prices in a mixed 
economy market. It provides information and incentives to guide decisions about 
what to produce and what to consume. Considered as a price, however, the 
exchange rate has special qualities. It is probably the single most important price 
in the economy. It affects numerous other prices and touches the interests of 
many people. This makes it the centre of much controversy with major exchange 
rate changes inviting popular attention. The exchange rate further links the 
general level of prices in the national economy with prices in other countries.  
Check Your Progress 1 
Note: 
i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Define Exchange Rate. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Why do exchange rates exist? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Why is it important to study the exchange rate regime?  
 …………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 


--- Page 6 ---
 
 
 
140 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments 7.4 EVOLUTION OF INTERNATIONAL 
EXCHANGE RATE REGIMES 
The first modern international exchange rate regime was the gold standard. The 
adoption of the Gold Standard was a gradual process. There was no international 
legal foundation—no treaties, agreements or conferences. The various versions of 
the gold standard used were:   
a) gold specie standard,  
b) gold bullion standard, and  
c) gold exchange standard.  
Fiat currencies are the norm in today's national economies and the current 
exchange rate regime.  Stages in the development of an exchange rate regime 
may be grouped under the following  four heads:   
7.4.1 The pre-World War I (WWI) financial order (1870–1914) 
The gold standard  widely adopted in this era rested on converting paper notes 
into pre-set quantities of gold. From the 1870s to the outbreak of World War I in 
1914, the world benefited from a well-integrated financial order, sometimes 
known as the first age of globalisation
. Transactions were facilitated by 
widespread participation in the gold standard  by independent nations and their 
colonies. This era saw mostly steady growth and a relatively low level of 
financial crises. The pre –
World War I financial order was not created at a single 
high-level conference; rather it evolved organically in a series of discrete steps.  
7.4.2 Between the World Wars (1919–1939) 
The years between the world wars have been described as a period of  
de-globalisation, as both international trade and capital flows shrank compared to 
the period before World War I. During World War I, countries had abandoned 
the gold standard and, except for the United States, returned to it only briefly. By 
the early '30s, the prevailing order was essentially a fragmented system of 
floating exchange rates.  In this era, the experience of Great Britain and others 
was that the gold standard ran counter to the need to retain domestic policy 
autonomy.  
By the end of World War I, Great Britain was heavily indebted to the United 
States, allowing the USA to largely displace her as the world's number one 
financial power. As the Great Depression  intensified in 1930, financial 
institutions were hit hard along with trade. Frequent changes in exchange rates 
introduced considerable uncertainty and made things difficult for the smooth 
conduct of international trade. This was amply proved by the experience of 
countries during the inter-war period, i.e., 1919-1939, which was marked by:  
i) competitive devaluation of currencies;  
ii) chaos in foreign exchange markets;  
iii) the decline in world trade;  


--- Page 7 ---
 
 
 
141 
Exchange Rate 
Regimes iv) imposition of trade restrictions; and  
v) widespread unemployment.   
The lessons of the inter-war experience with exchange rates are:  
a) exchange rates should be reasonably stable for the smooth conduct of 
international trade;  
b) this can be achieved if countries, particularly advanced countries, cooperate; 
and 
 
c) International cooperation is the basis of a sound international monetary 
system or international exchange arrangement.   
7.4.3 The Bretton Woods Era (1945–1971)  
The principal architects of the new system, John Maynard Keynes and Harry 
Dexter White created a plan which was endorsed by the 42 countries attending 
the 1944 Bretton Woods conference , formally known as the United Nations  
Monetary and Financial Conference. The plan involved nations agreeing to a 
fixed but adjustable exchange rate system where the currencies were pegged 
against the dollar, with the dollar itself convertible into gold. So in effect, this 
was a gold-dollar exchange standard. There were several improvements to the old 
gold standard. Two international institutions, the International Monetary Fund  
(IMF) and the World Bank were created. The new exchange rate system allowed 
countries facing economic hardship to devalue their currencies by up to 10% 
against the dollar (more if approved by the IMF) –
 thus they would not be forced 
to undergo deflation to stay in the gold standard. A system of capital controls was 
introduced to protect countries from the damaging effects of capital flight and to 
allow countries to pursue independent macroeconomic policies while still 
welcoming flows intended for productive investment. However, pressing 
circumstances caused President Nixon to end all convertibility into gold on 15 
August 1971. This event marked the effective end of the Bretton Woods system 
resulting in a system of floating exchange rates.    
7.4.4 The post-Bretton Woods system (1971–present) 
President Nixon is credited with ending the Bretton Woods Accord, and fixed 
rates of exchange, eventually creating a free-floating currency system . The 
current era has seen huge and turbulent flows of capital between nations. The 
transition away from Bretton Woods was marked by a switch 
from a state led to a 
market-led system. The Bretton Woods system is considered by economic 
historians to have broken down in the 1970s.  Crucial events being:  
i) Nixon suspended the dollar's convertibility into gold 
in 1971,  
ii) the United States abandonment of capital controls in 1974, and  
iii) the UK's ending of capital controls in 1979 which was swiftly copied by most 
other major economies.  


--- Page 8 ---
 
 
 
142 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments The contemporary exchange rate regime popularly known as ‘ non-system’ is 
profoundly different from those envisaged at the 1944 meeting at Bretton Woods. 
The IMF officially endorsed the non-system at a meeting in Jamaica in January 
1976.  In the current system, exchange rates among the major currencies 
(principally the U.S. dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen) fluctuate in response 
to market forces, with short-run volatility and occasional large medium-run 
swings. The IMF's approach continues to advise member countries on the 
implications of adopting different exchange rate regimes, consider the regime's 
choice to be a matter for each country to decide, and provide policy advice that is 
consistent with the maintenance of the chosen regime.
 
Check Your Progress 2 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Briefly outline the historical development of the exchange rate regime before 
World War II. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Examine the exchange rate regime from the Bretton Woods era to the present. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
7.5 FORMS OF EXCHANGE RATE REGIME 
7.5.1 Fixed exchange rate 
Under a fixed exchange rate system, a country's monetary authority agrees to 
manage its affairs to maintain a fixed ratio between the value of its own currency 
and that of other countries. A country's currency, therefore, has a definite 
objective value in terms of the other currencies into which it can be freely 
converted. The domestic currency is tied to another foreign currency, mostly 
more widespread currencies such as the U.S. dollar, the euro, the Pound Sterling 
or a basket of currencies. The government (or the central bank acting on the 
government's behalf) intervenes in the foreign exchange market to ensure that the 
exchange rate stays close to a predetermined 
target.  
Under this system, exchange rate stability is achieved but if the exchange rate is 
fixed at the wrong rate, it may be at the expense of domestic economic stability.  
In a fixed exchange rate system, a rise in the exchange rate of the domestic 
currency vis-à
-vis another foreign currency is called a devaluation. This means 


--- Page 9 ---
 
 
 
143 
Exchange Rate 
Regimes that more of the domestic currency is needed to buy 1 unit of a given foreign 
currency. On the other hand, when the exchange rate falls, it is termed as a 
revaluation. These terms imply a deliberate decision on the government's part to 
change the exchange rate level. For example, a government's policy decision to 
devalue the domestic currency vis-à-vis the US dollar from Rs.65 to Rs.70.  
It is important to realize that fixity cannot be achieved by simple government 
decree. There are powerful economic forces at work in the foreign exchange 
markets; restricting the movement of currencies requires equally decisive 
countervailing action by the authorities. This can take two broad forms: direct 
intervention in the foreign exchange using so-called open market operations, or 
the less direct option of interest rate manipulation.  Fixing an exchange rate very 
rarely involves establishing a single point away from which a currency is not 
permitted to move. The usual approach is to define a target zone for the currency. 
The authorities then respond with appropriate measures when market forces 
threaten to move the currency above or below the zone. Theoretically, then, it is 
possible to hold a currency at any given rate, so long as the associated excess 
demand or supply of the currency at that rate can be met. The other policy 
measure that can be used as an alternative or supplement to open market 
operations involves the noted use of interest rates. 
Advantages 
i) Provides greater certainty for exporters and importers as there are no or 
limited exchange rate risks. Hence it promotes long-term capital flows. 
ii) There is no fear of the adverse effect of speculation on the exchange rate.  
iii) Businesses have the knowledge that the price is fixed and therefore not going 
to change; it is relatively easier for them to plan.  
iv) Encourages international trade by making prices of goods involved in trade 
more predictable. It leads to low inflation.  
v) Imposes the discipline necessary for exchange rate stability; monetary policy 
must be coordinated.  Keynes was a chief architect of Bretton Woods and a 
strong proponent of fixed rates. Many Keynesians agree that government 
intervention is necessary to promote exchange rate stability. However, the 
question remains how to attain a stable exchange rate system? 
Disadvantages 
i) Have a high administration cost. Needs a complicated exchange control 
mechanism which 
may lead to the misallocation of resources. 
ii) A significant gap between the official rate and that determined by the market 
can promote black markets.  In a black market, most foreign exchange 
transactions are carried out outside the banking system.  
iii) This may force the government to draw down on reserves to meet its 
obligations and cause a scarcity of foreign exchange.  


--- Page 10 ---
 
 
 
144 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments iv) Restricts the ability of countries to conduct policy autonomously.   
v) Inimical to the very desirable objective of free trade.  
vi) May achieve exchange rate stability but at the expense of domestic economic 
stability. 
7.5.2 Floating exchange rate 
A flexible system follows free market principles. Exchange rate determination is 
left entirely to the currency supply and demand processes, and governments do 
not attempt to manipulate the market to have particular exchange rate outcomes. 
Popular regimes run the gamut from currency boards and traditional pegs to 
crawling pegs, target zones and floats with varying degrees of intervention .  It is 
closely related to monetary policy and the two are  generally dependent on many 
of the same factors. The broad system of flexible exchange rates prevailing in the 
world economy since 1973.   
Since mark
et forces determine the exchange rate, the upward and  downward 
movements in the value of the rupee are appreciation and  depreciation . 
Depreciation of the rupee refers to the decrease in the external value of the 
domestic currency that occurred due to the operation of market forces. 
Appreciation of the rupee refers to the increase in the external value of the 
domestic currency that occurred due to the operation of market forces. The 
exchange rate is determined in the open market through the pressure of buying 
and selling foreign currencies. 
Advantages   
i) A flexible exchange rate system confers several advantages upon economies 
that adopt it: 
ii) Continuous changes are easier to adjust to. 
iii) Less likely to permit a payments crisis to develop. Appropriate corrective 
exchange rate movements will swiftly dissipate any early or ‘incipient’ deficit 
or surplus that might arise.  This system automatically provides for a balance 
of payments stability without the need for any action whatsoever by policy-
makers. 
iv) Less politicized and authorities do not intervene in the market for foreign 
exchange and there is minimal need for international reserves. 
v) Less likely to have adverse domestic repercussions. Provides fewer incentives 
for destabilizing speculation. Financial instruments are available to  hedge the 
risks posed by a fluctuating exchange rate.  
vi) Allows nations to pursue their own  independent economic goals in respect of 
the other objectives of macro policy. Gives the government/monetary 
authorities flexibility in determining interest rates. This is because interest 
