--- Page 67 ---
 
 
 
201 
Approaches to 
Balance of  
Payments (BoP) 
results from the excess in the stock of money supply which is corrected by the 
outflow of foreign nations’ currency reserves from the domestic economy.  
This is the scenario of a nation's monetary stance when it operates in a fixed 
exchange regime where its monetary authorities have no control over its money 
supply in the long run.  
10.2.4.3 Monetary approach and flexible exchange rate 
The monetary approach under a flexible exchange rate can be expressed as one, 
where currency depreciation results from an excess in the stock of money supply 
whereas currency appreciation results from an excess in the stock of money 
demanded in a given economy at a point of time. Since a higher stock of money 
supply is equivalent to having inflation in the domestic nation, it can be stated 
that a nation experiencing inflationary trends will experience depreciation in the 
foreign currency price of its domestic currency or will find its exchange rate 
rising. Alternatively, a nation that experiences lower inflation than other nations 
will experience an appreciation of its domestic currency or will find its exchange 
rate falling.  Under a Flexible exchange rate, a benefit occurs to the nations in the 
form that a nation experiencing higher inflationary pressures will tend to transmit 
their inflation to the other nations through their rising imports rather than directly 
by exports of money reserves. Since alterations in the stock of imports and 
exports of goods and services is a real phenomenon that usually takes more time 
than any monetary change, the nations are somewhat shielded from the 
inflationary pressures as this rising import phenomenon is largely determined by 
structural conditions prevailing in any given nation.  
Under a flexible exchange rate regime, nations' monetary authorities uphold 
dominant control over the stock of their money supply and can therefore 
implement monetary policies to suit their country's monetary environment. Under 
this, the external balance is immediately corrected by automated changes in the 
level of exchange rates and thus no inflow or outflow of domestic or foreign 
nations' currency assets is required to maintain equilibrium unlike in the fixed 
exchange rate regime.  
Under both fixed and flexible exchange rates, the balance of payments surplus or 
deficit is adjusted through money market equilibrium. However, the equilibrium 
in both regimes is attained differently. Under fixed exchange rates, quantities of 
money adjust gradually through reserve flows to bring equality between actual 
and desired money stock. Under floating exchange rates, money market 
equilibrium occurs through domestic price changes that alter the valuation of the 
money stock. 
The transaction to floating exchange rate regimes in the 1970s changed the focus 
from the total BoP to its various subaccounts like the Current and Financial 
Account balances. These are the indicators of economic activities and currency 
repercussions to come. Although most nations strive for current account 


--- Page 68 ---
 
 
 
202 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments surpluses, it is not clear that a balance on the current or the capital account, or a 
surplus on the current account, is either sustainable or desirable.   
10.2.4.4 Criticisms of the monetary approach to BoP  
This has been criticized on the following grounds: 
1) Demand for money is not constant as assumed in the monetary approach to 
the balance of payments. In fact, in the real world, demand for money is only 
found to be stable in the long run and not in the short run.  
2) A direct link is assumed between money supply and equilibrium in the 
balance of payments account. This indicates that the central bank has control 
over the inflow and outflow of foreign exchange reserves in the country in 
consonance with surplus or deficit in the balance of payments accounts. 
However, economists have argued that such sterilization operations' are not 
feasible in the present era of globalization where financial markets are highly 
integrated and countries are following an approach of flexible exchange rates.  
3) The automatic self-adjustment mechanism highlighted in the monetary 
approach is feasible in long run. But it completely disregards the balance of 
payments disequilibria that exist in the short run. This is because the 
adjustments in the real sectors of the economy are not feasible to make in a 
short time. Thus, it will not be wrong to call the monetary approach a long-
run approach to adjustments in the balance of payments.  
4) The approach disregards factors other than monetary factors such as 
expansion or contraction of domestic credit that may create disequilibrium in 
the balance of payments account. It is asserted that completely disregarding 
the real sector disturbances is not a realistic assumption, and as such, 
disequilibrium may lead to adjustments through different routes in the 
balance of payments accounts.  
The above flaws doubt its usefulness as a foundation for effective balance of 
payments management in developing countries. It is consequently argued that 
efforts to correct payments deficits should look beyond monetary factors and 
consider tackling external debt problems and ensuring resource flows into deficit 
countries.  
Check Your Progress 2 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Trace the evolution of the monetary approach to BoP. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 


--- Page 69 ---
 
 
 
203 
Approaches to 
Balance of  
Payments (BoP) 
2) Given the assumptions of the monetary approach, how can you analyse that 
the BoP is a monetary phenomenon?   
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Point out the criticisms against the monetary approach to BoP.. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
4)  a) Which of the following will prevail in the BoP account when money 
supply exceeds money demand?  
i) Deficit  
ii) Surplus  
iii) Neither deficit nor surplus. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
b)  What condition prevails in the BoP account when money demand exceeds 
the level of the money supply?  
i) Deficit  
ii) Surplus  
iii) Neither deficit nor surplus  
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
5)  Explain how the monetary approach to BoP is essential:  
a) Short run phenomenon.  
b) Long run phenomenon.  
c) A phenomenon of short and long run both.. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 


--- Page 70 ---
 
 
 
204 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments  10.2.5 Synthesising all the approaches to BoP 
This section aims to provide a broad synoptic view of all the approaches. In the 
absorption approach income or  expenditure clears the balance of payments. The 
monetary approach concentrates on the accumulation of money balances only. 
The stock-flow consideration of the monetary approach is the essential difference 
between the monetary approach and the elasticities  and absorption approaches, 
where the latter two consider the flow equilibrium only. The monetary approach, 
like the absorption approach, stresses the need for reducing domestic expenditure 
relative to income, to eliminate a deficit in the balance of payme nts. However, 
whereas the absorption approach looks at the relationship between real output 
and expenditure on goods, the monetary approach concentrates on deficient or 
excess nominal demand for goods and securities, and the resulting accumulation 
or de-accumulation of money. 
The different theories seek to explain different aspects of the balance of 
payments, so they are considerably complementary rather than competitive. The 
elasticities or traditional approach seeks to explain the balance of trade; the 
Keynesian theory explains the current balance; the monetary theory explains the 
overall balance. The theories are complementary in another sense. The traditional 
theory is a microeconomic theory of adjustment in the goods market; the 
Keynesian theory (a macroeconomics theory) in the goods market and the 
monetary theory (a theory of disequilibrium) in the money market. However, a 
complete analysis must take account of both real and financial factors so neither 
Keynesian nor monetary analyses can  be complete in themselves. A complete 
analysis needs to look at both stocks and flows, Keynesian and monetary analyses 
are complementary as much as competitive. The monetary approach consists of 
the combination of two models: the money market and the fore ign exchange 
market. The changes in the money market lead to changes in real returns on 
securities denominated in different currencies. Then investors' subsequent 
reaction to the changes in real returns leads to changes in the relevant exchange 
rate.  
According to Alan Barrett, the monetary - approach to the balance of payments 
offers a richer and more satisfying analysis of the balance of payments as 
opposed to approaches which overshadowed it in the middle of the 20 th century. 
The monetary approach to BoP analysis ‘has been influenced directly by the 
changing character of international economic problems; in addition, however, it 
has also been affected by changing methodological fashions in the mainstream of 
economic thought’. The monetary approach to the ba lance of payments has 
drawn a good deal of attention from researchers. 
 


--- Page 71 ---
 
 
 
205 
Approaches to 
Balance of  
Payments (BoP) 
Check Your Progress 3 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Three major approaches to analysing the economic impact of currency 
deprecation are:  
a) the elasticities,  
b) the absorption, and  
c) the monetary.  
Distinguish among the three. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Are these approaches complementary? Give your answer. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
10.3  LET US SUM UP 
• Approaches to BoP  are commonly known as the elasticities, absorption, and 
monetary approaches. The elasticity approach emphasizes the relative price 
effects of depreciation and suggests that depreciation works best when 
demand elasticities are high. As stated in the Marshall-Lerner condition, if the 
sum of the elasticities is less than one, currency depreciation will cause 
deterioration in a nation’s trade position. A nation’s trade balance remains 
unaffected by depreciation if the sum of the demand elasticities equals one.  
• The absorption approach emphasizes the income effects of currency 
depreciation. According to this view, depreciation may initially stimulate a 
nation’s exports and production of import -competing goods. The implication 
is that a decrease in domestic expen diture relative to income must occur for 
depreciation to promote trade equilibrium.  
• The Keynesian analysis is an analysis of flows-flows of goods that are traded, 
and of income. The monetary analysis is an analysis of stocks, especially 
money stocks. The monetary approach stresses the effects depreciation has on 
the purchasing power of money and the resulting impact on domestic 
expenditure levels. The monetary approach establishes the link between BoP 
deficits, the intervention required in the foreign exch ange market and the 
amount of money supply to prevail in a fixed exchange regime.  


--- Page 72 ---
 
 
 
206 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments • The monetary approach considers inter -relationships among various markets 
and the inter-relationship between stock and flow equilibrium. The monetary 
approach focuses exclusively on investors’ decisions between two securities. 
It considers investment -related factors in exchange rate determination. 
Investors compare the real interest rates in two countries.  
• Under flexible exchange rates remember that the exchange rate bears a ll the 
strain of balance to payments imbalance. The main difference between the 
balance of payments deficit corrections under fixed and floating exchange 
rates is the absence of any need for expenditure reduction under floating 
rates. 
10.4 KEY WORDS 
The Asset Approach to BoP Pays its exclusive focus on the behaviour of 
international investors who are trying to 
decide between securities denominated in 
two different currencies. Based on this, the 
monetary approach is also called the asset 
approach to ex change rate determination  
because by definition the price of one 
national money in terms of another.  
Domestic credit policy A way of measuring growth in the total 
amount of money in a country's economy at 
a particular time.  
International reserves International reserves are any kind of 
reserve funds that can be passed between 
the central banks of different countries. 
International reserves are an acceptable 
form of payment between these banks. 
International reserves are a country’s  
‘external assets ’—including foreign 
currency deposits and bonds held by central 
banks and monetary authorities, gold and 
SDRs.  
Sterilization policy This is a form of monetary action in which 
a central bank seeks to limit the effect of 
inflows and outflows of capital on the 
money supply. It most frequently involves 
the purchase or sale of financial assets by a 
central bank and is designed to offset the 
effect of foreign exchange intervention. 


--- Page 73 ---
 
 
 
207 
Approaches to 
Balance of  
Payments (BoP) 
10.5  SOME USEFUL REFERENCES 
Acharyya, Rajat (2014): International Economics, 1st edition, Oxford University 
Press, New Delhi  
Barrett, Alan (1989): The Monetary Approach to The Balance of Payments.  
https://www.tcd.ie/Economics/assets/pdf/SER/1989/The%20Monetary%20appro
ach%20to%20the%20Balance%20of%20Payments%20By%20Alan%20Barrett.p
df 
Frenkel, Jacob A., and Harry G. Johnson (1976): The Monetary Approach to the 
Balance of 
Payments, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, Canada 
Gowland, David (2012): International Economics, Chapter 9, Barnes and Noble 
Books, Totowa, New Jersey, USA 
IMF (1977): The Monetary Approach to the Balance of Payments: A Collection 
of Research Papers by Members of the Staff of the International Monetary 
Fund, September 15 
Krugman, Paul R.,  Maurice Obstfeld , and Marc Melitz   (2014): International 
Economics: Theory and Policy , 10 th edition, Pearson Education Ltd., Harlow, 
England, UK  
Mulhearn, Chris, et. al , (2008): Economics for Business , Palgrave, New York, 
USA  
Salvatore, Dominick (2010): International Economy, 8th edition, Wiley India Pvt. 
Ltd., New Delhi 
Website:  
http://www.economicsdiscussion.net/balance-of-payment/the-modern-theory-of-
balance-of-payment-adjustment/6597 
10.6  ANSWERS/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES  
Check your progress 1  
1) See section 10.2.1 
2) See section 10.2 
3) See section 10.2.3 
4) See sections 10.2.1, 10.2.3, and 10.2.3 and frame your answer. 
5) See sections 10.2.1, 10.2.3, and 10.2.3 and make the differences clear.  


--- Page 74 ---
 
 
 
208 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments Check your progress 2 
1) See section 10.2.4  
2) See section 10.2.4.1 
3)  See section 10.2.4.4 
4) a) see section 10.2.4.1 
b) see section 10.2.4.1  
5) See section 10.2.4.1 
Check your progress 3 
1) See section 10.2.5 
2) See section 10.2.5 
 
