--- Page 11 ---
 
 
 
145 
Exchange Rate 
Regimes rates do not have to be set to keep the value of the exchange rate within pre-
determined bands. 
vii) Offers the most appropriate framework for the international allocation of 
resources through the trade process. 
Disadvantages 
i) Market forces may fail to determine the appropriate exchange rate; hence, the 
floating exchange rate regime may not provide the desired results and may 
lead to the misallocation of resources. 
ii) It is impossible to have an exchange rate system without official intervention.  
The government may not intervene, however domestic monetary policy and 
fiscal policy would influence the exchange rate. 
iii) A wildly fluctuating exchange rate is at the mercy of national and 
international currency speculators. A volatile exchange rate introduces 
considerable uncertainty in export and import prices and consequently to 
economic development. At the same time, the abolition of exchange controls 
causes capital flight. 
7.5.3 Managed floating 
Many countries are practising a system of the managed floating exchange rate at 
present. The central banks have been trying to control fluctuations of exchange 
rates around some ‘narrow band ’, however, the demand and supply forces 
determine the exchange rate.  The decision to vary exchange rates can occur in 
the context of a variety of international monetary payment schemes. Countries 
may operate at a fixed rate but allow occasional variations for fundamental 
disequilibria. This is the adjustable peg system  whereby rates can be pegged at 
new levels. Countries may allow rates to vary freely within agreed bands. 
Countries may allow unrestricted variation of rates. This allows a country to 
dispense with holding foreign reserves which represent a sacrifice of 
consumption.  
In this hybrid exchange rate system, the exchange rate is determined in the 
foreign exchange market through
 the operation of market forces. Market forces 
mean the selling and buying activities by various individuals and institutions. The 
management of a floating rate is sometimes referred to in the literature as a ' dirty 
float’. It is unlikely that the authorities in any country could remain completely 
indifferent to the behaviour of the exchange rate, and yet this is what the 
advocate of completely flexibl e rates recommends. Managed or dirty floating is 
the more usual alternative to participation in a fixed exchange rate system. In 
practice, a managed fiat permits the authorities to intervene in the foreign 
exchange markets, using direct open market operati ons, interest rates,  or some 
combination of both.  
 


--- Page 12 ---
 
 
 
146 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments In this context, the following table is very instructive:  
Table 7.1: Forms of exchange rate regime 
 
Fixed  Adjustable  Crawling  Managed  Winder Freely 
(pegged) Peg  Peg  Float  Band 
 Floating 
Exchange        System
 Exchange 
Rate         
 Rate  
 
 
 
 
          A B 
In the Table, as one moves from point A on the left to point B on the right, both 
the frequency of intervention by domestic monetary authorities and the required 
level of international reserves tend to be lower. Under a pure fixed-exchange-rate 
regime (point A), authorities intervene so that the value of the domestic currency 
vis-a-vis another country's currency says the US Dollar, is maintained at a 
constant rate. Under a freely floating exchange-rate regime, authorities do not 
intervene in the market for foreign exchange and there is minimal need for 
international reserves.  
However, it remains true that there is no single exchange rate regime that is best 
for all countries in all circumstances. Countries continue to have the scope to 
choose the type of exchange rate regime that best suits their needs, always with 
the proviso that the chosen regime must be credibly supported by policies 
consistent with the choice. In light of important changes which include the 
general increase in capital mobility and the abrupt reversals of capital flows to 
developing and transition economies. 
7.5.4  Recurrence of instability suggests a new regime  
It is important to note that currently there have been shifting trends  in the 
exchange rate regime. After the breakdown of Bretton Woods,
 countries ha ve 
adopted a wide variety of regimes, ranging from 'dollarisation' and currency 
boards to simple pegs and basket pegs, crawling pegs and target zones to clean 
floats and dirty floats.  There is such an abundance of possible linkages between 
the exchange rate regime and macroeconomic performance —some offsetting, 
others reinforcing —that, at a theoretical level, it is difficult to establish any 
unambiguous relationships at all. While increased capital mobility has been 
leading an increasing number of countries to either end of the spectrum between 
firmly fixed rates (or monetary unification) and free-floating, intermediate 
regimes are likely to remain viable and appropriate in many cases. 


--- Page 13 ---
 
 
 
147 
Exchange Rate 
Regimes The recurrence of concerns and phases of instability suggests a need to look for 
durable remedies. Leaders continue to campaign for Bretton Woods II.  It has 
been a feature of the non-system that exchange rates have at times, moved to 
positions that appear to be at variance with conditions prevailing in, and the 
longer-term interests of, domestic economies. Currently, the world economy is 
generally organised along flexible lines, but many countries choose to manage 
their currencies either alongside or in partnership with other currencies and 
countries.  
There is a demand for reform in the International Monetary System. Zhou 
Xiaochuan, the former governor of the People's Bank of China  proposed a 
gradual move towards increased use of IMF special drawing rights  (SDRs) as a 
centrally managed global reserve currency. His proposal attracted much 
international attention.   In December 2011, the Bank of England  published a 
paper arguing for reform, saying that the current regime has performed poorly 
compared to the Bretton Woods system.  
The steps required to move to an SDR-based system would be groundbreaking. A 
somewhat less ambitious alternative would be to make the SDR one of the 
alternative reserve currencies in a multicurrency system. Despite its relative 
stability, the current ‘ non-system’ has the  inherent weaknesses of a setup with a 
dominant country-issued reserve currency, wherein the reserve issuer runs fiscal 
and external deficits to meet growing world demand for reserve assets and where 
there is no ready mechanism forcing surplus or reserve-issuing countries to 
adjust.  
The current system has flaws, including occasional bouts of serious instability, 
but it has proved its strength and resilience when the conceivable alternatives 
have not. Charting the road ahead, the main task should be to help policymakers 
think beyond the status quo in fundamental ways. In this spirit, serious 
consideration should be given to alternatives to self-insurance, and to the 
potential—
practical and political —for other currencies to acquire a greater role 
in the global reserve system. Such work could help the system evolve to shape 
developments rather than the other way around, as has historically tended to be 
the norm. 
Neither the theory nor country experiences are very conclusive nor do exchange 
rate regimes have their benefits and costs. The suitability of a particular regime, 
however, depends on the policy target of a country. 
Check Your Progress 3 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  What are the main types of exchange rate systems? Does the choice of 
exchange rate regime matter? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 


--- Page 14 ---
 
 
 
148 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments 2) Explain the differences between fixed and flexible exchange rate systems and 
the advantages and disadvantages of each. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) What is Managed Floating Exchange Rate System? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
4) What are the main factors which determine the effectiveness of a floating 
exchange rate policy? Currently, which type of system determines the values 
of the major currencies, such as the Dollar, Yen, and Euro? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
5) What is a currency appreciation or depreciation? Point out the advantages and 
disadvantages of each. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
6) Explain how the choice of an exchange rate regime alters the conduct of 
monetary policy? 
…………………………………………………………
………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
7) Do you think the operation of non-system and recurrence of crisis needs a 
new regime for currency? 
…………………………………………………………
………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
7.6  INDIA’S EXCHANGE RATE REGIME 
The main  objectives of India’s exchange rate policy are to ensure that  the 
economic fundamentals are truly reflected in the external value of the rupee. In 
the post-independence period, India's exchange rate policy has shifted from  a par 
value system to a basket-peg and  to a managed float exchange rate system. The 
policy has evolved in line with the gradual opening up  of the economy as part of 
the broader strategy of macroeconomic reforms and  liberalization since the early 
1990s.  


--- Page 15 ---
 
 
 
149 
Exchange Rate 
Regimes India's rupee has matured to a regime of the floating exchange rate from the 
earlier versions of a ' managed float’. The exchange rate policy is guided by the 
need to reduce excess volatility, prevent the emergence of speculative activities, 
help maintain adequate reserves, and develop an orderly foreign exchange 
market. The current exchange rate regime has been accompanied by full 
‘Convertibility on current account ’ with effect from August 20, 1994. Moving 
forward, as India progresses towards full capital account convertibility and gets 
more and more integrated with the rest of the world, managing periods of 
volatility is bound to pose greater challenges given the impossible trinity of 
independent monetary policy, open capital account and exchange rate 
management. The principal features of the current exchange rate regime in India 
can 
be stated as follows: 
i) The rates of exchange are determined in the market. 
ii) The freely floating exchange rate regime continues to operate within the 
exchange control framework. 
iii) RBI can intervene in the market to modulate the volatility and sharp 
depreciation of the rupee.  
iv) The US dollar is the principal currency for RBI transactions. 
v) The RBI also announces a Reference Rate based on the quotations of select 
banks in Bombay at noon every day. The Reference Rate applies to SDR 
transactions and transactions routed through the Asia Clearing Union. 
Check Your Progress 4 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Trace the historical development of the exchange rate regime in India. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Discuss some of the features of the current exchange rate system in India. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
7.7  LET US SUM UP 
In this unit we discussed about various exchange rate regimes. Exchange rate 
regime is an integral part of every country’s economic and monetary policy. An 
exchange-rate regime is a way an authority manages its currency in relation to 
other currencies and the foreign exchange market. There are three types of 
exchange rate systems globally: flexible or floating exchange rate systems, fixed 
exchange rate systems and
 managed floating (intermediate exchange rate 


--- Page 16 ---
 
 
 
150 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments system). Under fixed exchange rates , governments decide to fix their rates to 
some other standard, either a dominant currency such as the dollar, or a basket of 
currencies or gold. Under floating exchan ge rates, the market determines the 
outcomes of rates.  In a floating exchange rate regime  the market’s demand for 
and supply of the currency determines the exchange rate. There is no pre -
determined official target for the exchange rate set by the government. The latter 
and/or the central bank can indirectly influence the exchange rate by manag ing 
the level of domestic and foreign currencies in the banking system.  In managed 
exchange rate regimes, the value of the currency is determined to vary degrees by 
government intervention. A country can alter the degree to which it intervenes in 
the fore ign exchange market. Managed float  is also referred to as dirty float .  
The exchange rate is the dominant target of economic policymaking. 
Balance of payments on current account disequilibrium can automatically be 
restored to equilibrium through a floating exchange rate regime and the scarcity 
or surplus of any currency is eliminated. Balance of payment adjustment is 
smoother and painless under a floating exchange rate regime compared to a fixed 
exchange 
rate system. The autonomy of monetary authorities is preserved under a 
floating exchange rate system as there is no target exchange rate to maintain.  
Since 1971 exchange rate system is known as a non-system.
 This variety of 
exchange rate regimes exists in today’s global financial environment.  
The history of exchange rate regimes can be categorised into four parts in the 
following way:  
i) Before World War I (WWI) financial order (1870–1914) 
ii) Inter-war period  (1919–1939) 
iii) The Bretton Woods system (1945-1971).  
iv) The post-Bretton Woods system (1971–present): the non-system. 
In the post-independence period, India's exchange rate policy has seen a shift 
from a par value system to a basket -peg and further to a managed float exchange 
rate system during the period 1947 to 1971. In March 1993 the system of th e 
market-determined exchange rate was adopted. However, the RBI did not 
relinquish its right to intervene in the market to enable orderly control. 
7.8  KEY WORDS 
The black market for foreign 
exchange 
is a market where foreign currencies are 
exchanged for the national currency of a 
country at a premium over the rate at 
which the value of the national currency is 
pegged by its monetary authority. A black 
market for foreign exchange is an outcome 
of an over -valued pegged exchange rate 


--- Page 17 ---
 
 
 
151 
Exchange Rate 
Regimes regime together with binding exchange 
control.  
BoP crisis is a situation where foreign currency 
reserves held by a country's central bank 
dry up and the country defaults on 
payment for its imports and debt 
repayment. A BoP crisis emerged for India 
in early 1991 when it had foreign currency 
reserves that could barely finance a week’s 
imports. 
Clean float a regime where a country's monetary 
authority does not intervene in the foreign 
exchanges market in any way whatsoever 
and allows the price of its own currency in 
terms of a particular foreign currency to 
adjust to market conditions. 
Conventional Pegs are those in which the authorities intervene 
to keep the exchange rate at a pre-arranged 
level. 
Convertibility of rupee on 
capital account 
means the freedom to convert rupees into 
foreign currency and back for  capital 
transactions. It is a feature of a nation's 
financial regime that centres  on the ability 
to conduct transactions of local financial 
assets into foreign financial assets freely or 
at country-determined exchange rates. It is 
sometimes referred to as capital asset 
liberation or CAC. 
Convertibility of rupee on 
current account 
implies that the Indian rupee can be 
converted to any foreign currency at 
existing market rates for trade purposes for 
any amount. Anyone who deals in  the 
current account  means international trade 
of goods and services  can convert them to 
Indian Rupees. 
Crawling Pegs when the exchange rate is regularly 
adjusted in the same direction by a pre -
arranged amount. 
Currency Boards the regime under which the only role of 
monetary policy is to keep the domestic 
currency’s value constant relative to a 
particular foreign currency. 


--- Page 18 ---
 
 
 
152 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments Devaluation is a deliberate downward adjustment to the 
value of a country's currency relative to 
another currency, group of currencies or 
standard. Devaluation is a  monetary 
policy tool used by countries that have 
a fixed exchange rate  or semi -fixed 
exchange rate. It is often confused 
with depreciation and is the opposite of 
revaluation. 
Dirty float is a currency that  floats in value in terms 
of other currencies but is not free of 
government intervention. Governments 
intervene to smooth fluctuations or 
manage a desired exchange rate. 
Dollarization involves one country unilaterally adopting 
the currency of another. 
Exchange control is a cap imposed by the monetary authority 
of a country on foreign currency buying by 
its domestic importers and other buyers. 
Full Convertibility of rupee fully convertible , when there are no 
current account or capital account 
restrictions for free movement of funds 
into and out of the country. As there are a 
lot of restrictions for the free movement of 
funds from India and also into the 
country, Indian Rupee  is not  fully 
convertible. 
Gold standard was an international monetary system in 
which gold was the reserve asset against 
coins and currencies in circulation in 
different countries. With the gold standard, 
countries agreed to convert paper money 
into a fixed amount of gold. A country that 
uses the gold standard sets a fixed price for 
gold and buys and sells gold at that price. 
International currency system defines the parameters of the foreign 
exchange market where national 
currencies are exchanged and traded. 
Managed Floating Rates these are the rates under which authorities 
intervene to limit short -term currency 
fluctuations without the goal to keep the 
exchange rate at a certain level. 


--- Page 19 ---
 
 
 
153 
Exchange Rate 
Regimes Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) IMF created an international reserve asset 
in 1969 to support the Bretton Woods 
fixed exchange rate system. It is defined as 
the weighted average of four major 
currencies – euro, Japanese yen, pound 
sterling, and USD. 
The Bretton Woods system was a gold -USD exchange standard that 
defined the international  currency system 
during 1944 -71. Currencies of different 
countries were pegged to the USD, which, 
in turn, was convertible into gold at USD 
35 per ounce. 
7.9  SOME USEFUL REFERENCES 
Acharyya, Rajat (2014): International Economics, Chapter 22, 1st edition, Oxford 
University Press, New Delhi  
Carbaugh, Robert J (2015): International Economics , Chapter 11, 11 th edition, 
Cengage Learning India Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi  
Czinkota, Michael R et, al  (2011): International Business , Cengage Learning 
India Pvt. Ltd, India 
Gowland, David (2012): International Economics, Chapter 9, Barnes and Noble 
Books, Totowa, New Jersey, USA 
Krugman, Paul R., Maurice Obstfeld , and Marc Melitz  
 (2014): International 
Economics: Theory and Policy, 10th edition, Pearson Education Ltd., New Delhi  
Mark Stone, et, al, ( 2008): Exchange Rate Regimes, Finance and, Development, 
IMF, March 
Mulhearn, Chris, et. al , (2008): Economics for Business , Chapter 14, Palgrave, 
New York, USA  
Pugel, Thomas A (2016): International Economics, Chapter 17, 16th edition, Tata 
McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, Ltd, New Delhi 
Salvatore, Dominick (2004): International Economy, 8th edition, Wiley India Pvt. 
Ltd., New Delhi 
Sodersten, Bo and Geoffrey Reed (1994):  International Economics, Chapter 17, 
3rd edition, Palgrave MacMillan, London, UK. 


--- Page 20 ---
 
 
 
154 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments 7.10  ANSWERS/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES  
Check your progress 1  
1) see section 7.2 
2) see section 7.2 
3) see section 7.3 
Check your progress 2 
1) see sections 7.4.1 and 7.4.2 
2) see sections 7.4.3 and 7.4.4 
Check your progress 3 
1) See section 7.5.1 and 7.5.2 
2) See section 7.5.1 and 7.5.2 
3) See section 7.5.3  
4) See section 7.5.3 and 7.5.4 
5) See section 7.5.2 
6) See section 7.5.3 and 7.5.4 
7) See section 7.5.3 and 7.5.4 
Check your progress 4 
1) See section 7.6  
2) See section 7.6  
 
