--- Page 39 ---
 
 
 
173 
Impossible Trinity: 
Alternative 
Scenarios UNIT 9  IMPOSSIBLE TRINITY: AL TERNATIVE 
SCENARIOS  
Structure 
9.0 Objectives 
9.1   Introduction 
9.2  The Concept of Impossible trinity 
9.3 Theoretical underpinning: Mundell-Fleming model  
9.4 Impossible Trinity: alternative scenarios countries’ experience 
9.5 Importance of Impossible Trinity 
9.6 Impossible trinity and demand for capital account convertibility of India’s 
rupee 
9.7  Let us sum up  
9.8  Key terms 
9.9  Some Useful Books 
9.10 Answer/Hints to Check your Progress Exercises     
9.0  OBJECTIVES 
After studying this Unit, you should be able to:  
• define the concept of the impossible trinity; 
• identify the components of the impossible trinity; 
• examine the impossibility of achieving all three components simultaneously; 
• analyse the empirical evidence in the context of the impossible trinity; 
• point out the problem of rupee convertibility in meeting the conditions of the 
impossible trinity; and  
• highlight the importance of the study of the impossible trinity. 
9.1   INTRODUCTION 
Macroeconomic policy trilemma, also called the impossible trinity, means that a 
country must choose between free capital mobility, exchange -rate management 
and an independent monetary policy. Only two of the three are possible. A 
country that wishes to fix its currency's value and has an interest -rate policy free 
from outside influence cannot allow capital to flow freely across its borders. The 
 
 Contributed by  Prof. S.K. Singh, Retd. Prof. IGNOU 


--- Page 40 ---
 
 
 
174 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments articulators of the concept in the 1960s were J. Marcus Fleming  and Robert A. 
Mundell. The impossible trinity is a simple rule with deep implications. This 
trilemma is being faced by many countries. China faced this trilemma when the 
exchange rate was fixed but the country was open to cross-border capital flows, it 
cannot have an independent monetary policy. Similarly, Britain has this trilemma 
when it chose free capital mobility and wanted monetary autonomy it had to 
allow its currency to float. There are many findings from empirical studies where 
governments that have tried to pursue all three goals simultaneously have failed.  
This is the prevailing global monetary scenario where the two -from-three 
combinations most modern economies choose.  
9.2  THE CONCEPT OF IMPOSSIBLE TRINITY 
The concept is derived from the academic works of Canadian e conomist Robert 
Mundell and British economist Marcus Fleming in the early 1960s. This principle 
is frequently called ‘ the Unholy Trinity ,’ the ‘ Irreconcilable Trinity ,’ the 
‘Inconsistent trinity ’ or the Mundell -Fleming ‘ trilemma’. This is a concept 
in international economics which states that it is impossible to have all three of 
the following at the same time: 
i) a fixed foreign exchange rate; 
ii) free capital movement (absence of capital controls); 
iii) an independent monetary policy. 
Under the impossible trinity ( a play on ' dilemma’), two policy positi ons are 
possible. If a nation were to adopt position  a, for example, it would maintain a 
fixed exchange rate and allow free capital flows, the consequence of which 
would be a loss of monetary independence. A central bank can only pursue two 
of the three po licies mentioned above simultaneously. To see why consider this 
example: 
Assume that the world interest rate is at 5%. Suppose the home central bank tries 
to set the domestic interest rate at a rate lower than 5%, for example at 2%. In 
that case, there will be depreciation pressure on the home currency , because 
investors would want to sell their low -yielding domestic currency and buy 
higher-yielding foreign currency. I f the central bank also wants to have free 
capital flows, the only way it could prevent the home currency's depreciation is to 
sell its foreign currency reserves. Since the foreign currency reserves of a central 
bank are limited, once the reserves are depl eted, the domestic currency will 
depreciate.  Hence, all three of the policy objectives cannot be pursued 
simultaneously. A central bank has to forgo one of the three objectives. Three out 
of three are not possible, but two out of three are not bad.  


--- Page 41 ---
 
 
 
175 
Impossible Trinity: 
Alternative 
Scenarios 
9.3  THEORETICAL UNDERPINNING: MUNDELL – 
FLEMING MODEL 
The Mundell-Fleming model integrates international trade and finance into 
macroeconomic theory. This approach was developed in the early 1960s by the 
Canadian economist Robert Mundell (winner of the 1999 Nobel Prize in 
economics) and the British economist J. Marcus Fleming (1911–1976). Both 
authors were members of the IMF's research department. They independently 
extended the traditional Keynesian model to an open economy set-up in which 
the capital and goods markets are internationally integrated. The resulting 
research constitutes the original version of the Mundell-Fleming model (Mundell 
1963; Fleming 1962). The model states that, in the long run, a central bank that 
hopes to conduct independent monetary policy must choose between maintaining 
a fixed foreign exchange rate and allowing the free movement of capital. For 
instance, a central bank that chooses to increase the total money supply by 
adopting a loose monetary policy cannot hope to maintain the foreign exchange 
value of its currency unless it resorts to restricting the sale of domestic currency 
in the currency market.  
Basic set -up*: The model is an extension of the IS -LM model. The traditional 
IS-LM model deals with the economy under autarky (or a closed economy), 
whereas the Mundell-Fleming model tries to describe an ope n economy. 
Typically, the Mundell-Fleming model portrays the relationship between the 
nominal exchange rate and an economy's output (unlike the relationship between 
interest rate and the output in the IS -LM model) in the short run. The Mundell-
Fleming model has been used to argue that an economy cannot simultaneously 
maintain a fixed exchange rate, free capital movement, and an independent 
monetary policy.  The traditional model is based on the following equations. 
Y = C + I + G + NX (The IS Curve) 
Where Y is GDP,  
C is consumption,  
I is investment,  
G is government spending, and  
NX is net exports. 
M  
= L (i, Y) (The LM Curve) P 
Where M is the money supply,  
P is the average price,  
L is liquidity, i is the interest rate, and Y is GDP 


--- Page 42 ---
 
 
 
176 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments  BoP =CA+KA (The BoP Curve (Balance of Payments)) 
Where CA is the current account and  
KA is the capital account 
IS components  
C = C(Y – T, i – E(π)) 
Where C is consumption,  
Y is GDP,  
T is taxes,  
i is the interest rate,  
E(π) is the expected rate of inflation 
I = I (i – E(π), Y – 1) 
Where I is investment,  
i is the interest rate,  
E(π) is the expected rate of inflation,  
Y – 1 is GDP in the previous period 
G = G  
Where G is government spending, an exogenous variable 
NX = NX(e, Y,Y*) 
Where NX is net exports,  
e is the real exchange rate,  
Y is GDP,  
Y* is the GDP of a foreign country 
BoP components 
 CA = NX   
Where CA is the current account and  
NX is net exports 
KA = z(i - i  *) + k 
Where z is the level of capital mobility,  
i is the interest rate,  
i* is the foreign interest rate,  
k is capital investments not related to i, an exogenous variable 
 


--- Page 43 ---
 
 
 
177 
Impossible Trinity: 
Alternative 
Scenarios 
A critical assumption of the model is the equalization of the local interest rate to 
the global interest rate. 
Changes in money supply: An increase in the money supply shifts the LM curve 
downward. This directly reduces the local interest rate and forces the local 
interest rate to lower than the global interest rate. This depreciates the exchange 
rate of local currency through capital outflow. Hot money flows out to take 
advantage of higher interest rates abroad, so currency depreciates. This leads to 
the shifting of the IS curve (Y = C + I + G + NX) to the right, where the local 
interest rate equalizes with the global rate. A decrease in the money supply 
causes the exact opposite of the process. 
Changes in government spending : An increase in government expenditure 
shifts the IS curve to the ri ght. The shift causes the local interest rate to go above 
the global rate. The increase in local interest causes capital inflow, making the 
local currency stronger than foreign currencies. A strong exchange rate also 
makes foreign goods cheaper compared to  local goods. This encourages greater 
import and discourages export and hence lower net export. As a result, the IS 
returns to its original level, where the local interest rate is equal to the global 
interest rate. The level of income of the local economy stays the same. The LM 
curve is not at all affected. A decrease in government expenditure reverses the 
process. 
Changes in global interest rate : An increase in the global interest rate causes 
upward pressure on the local interest rate. The pressure subside s as the local rate 
closes in on the global rate. When a positive differential between the global and 
the local rate occurs, holding the LM curve constant, capital flows out of the 
local economy. This depreciates the local currency and helps boost net expo rt. 
Increasing net export shifts the IS to the right. This shift continues to the right 
until the local interest rate becomes as high as the global rate. A decrease in the 
global interest rate causes the reverse to occur. 
Changes in money supply : Under the  fixed exchange rate system, the local 
central bank only changes the money supply to maintain a specific exchange rate. 
Suppose there is pressure to depreciate the domestic currency's exchange rate 
because the supply of domestic currency exceeds its demand  in foreign exchange 
markets. In that case, the local authority buys a domestic currency with foreign 
currency to decrease the domestic currency's supply in the foreign exchange 
market. This returns the domestic currency's exchange rate to its original lev el. 
Suppose there is pressure to appreciate the domestic currency's exchange rate 
because the currency's demand exceeds its supply in the foreign exchange 
market. In that case, the local authority buys a foreign currency with domestic 
currency to increase the domestic currency's supply in the foreign exchange 
market. This returns the exchange rate to its original level. A revaluation occurs 
when there is a permanent increase in the exchange rate and hence, a decrease in 
the money supply. Devaluation is the exact opposite of revaluation. 


--- Page 44 ---
 
 
 
178 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments i       IS1                    LM 
            IS                                           LM1 
 
         
 
                     FE 
iw 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                    Y 
An increase in government spending forces the monetary authority to flood the 
market with local currency to keep the exchange rate unchanged. 
Figure 9.1: Changes in IS-LM due to changes in Money supply 
The local monetary authority in the framework of a fixed system controls the 
exchange rate. To maintain the exchange rate and eliminate pressure from it, the 
monetary authority purchases foreign currencies with local currency until the 
pressure is gone, i.e., back to the original level. Such action shifts the LM curve 
in tandem with the direction of the IS shift. This action increases the local 
currency supply in the market and lowers the exchange rate—or rather returns the 
rate to i ts original state. In the end, the exchange rate stays the same but the 
general income in the economy increases.  
If the global interest rate increases above the domestic rate, capital flows out to 
take advantage of this  opportunity. Hot money flows out of  the economy. This 
would depreciate the home currency, so the central bank may buy the home 
currency and sell some of its foreign currency reserves to offset this outflow. 
This decrease in the money supply shifts the LM curve to the left until the 
domestic interest rate is the global interest rate. The opposite occurs if the global 
interest rate declines below the domestic rate. Hot money flows in, and the home 
currency appreciates. The central bank offsets this by increasing the money 
supply (selling domestic currency, buying foreign currency), the LM curve shifts 
to the right, and the domestic interest rate becomes the global interest rate.  
Differences from IS -LM: It is worth noting that some of the results from this 
model differ from the IS -LM because of  the open economy assumption. The 
result for a large open economy on the other hand falls within the result predicted 
by the IS -LM and the Mundell-Fleming models. The reason for such a result is 
that a large open economy has both the characteristics of aut arky and a small 
open economy. In the IS -LM, the interest rate is the key component in making 
both the money market and the goods market in equilibrium. Under the Mundell-
Fleming framework of a small open economy, the interest rate is fixed and 
equilibrium in both markets can only be achieved by a change in the nominal 
exchange rate. 


--- Page 45 ---
 
 
 
179 
Impossible Trinity: 
Alternative 
Scenarios 
Example: A much -simplified version of the Mundell-Fleming model can be 
illustrated by a small open economy, in which the domestic interest rate is 
exogenously predetermined by the world interest rate (r=r*). Consider an 
exogenous increase in government expenditure, the IS curve shifts upward, with 
LM curve intact, causing the interest rate and the output to rise (partial crowding 
out effect) under the IS -LM model.  Nevertheless, as the interest rate is 
predetermined in a small open economy, the LM 1 curve (of exchange rate and 
output) is vertical, which means there is exactly one output that can make the 
money market in the equilibrium under that interest rate. Even t hough the IS 1 
curve can still shift up, it causes a higher exchange rate and the same level of 
output (complete crowding out effect, which is different in the IS -LM model).  
This example makes an implicit assumption of a flexible exchange rate. The 
Mundell-Fleming model can have completely different implications under 
different exchange rate regimes. For instance, monetary policy becomes 
ineffective under a fixed exchange rate system, with perfect capital mobility. An 
expansionary monetary policy resulting i n an outward shift of the LM curve 
would in turn make capital flow out of the economy. The central bank under a 
fixed exchange rate system would have to intervene by selling foreign money in 
exchange for domestic money to depreciate the foreign currency an d appreciate 
the domestic currency. Selling foreign money and receiving domestic money 
would reduce real balances in the economy, until the LM curve shifts back to the 
left, and the interest rates come back to the world rate of interest i*. 
*This section is largely based on the contributions of over twenty authors 
 (http://gobernanzamedioambiental.org/brugger/Mundell%E2%80%93Fleming%20model.pdf) 
There is another way to understand the trilemma. Let us look at the diagram 
given below:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.2: The “Impossible trinity” of Capital, Money and exchange 
The diagram represents the impossible trinity. In this schematic, the open capital 
account is labelled "A", the fixed exchange rate is labelled "B," and the 
independent monetary policy is labelled "C."  
 
Open Capital Account` (A) 
Independent 
Monetary Policy (C) 
Fixed Exchange 
rate (B) 


--- Page 46 ---
 
 
 
180 
Exchange Rate and  
Balance of Payments In terms of the Figure 9.2 (Oxelheim, 1990), the following are the options: 
i) “A”: A stable exchange rate and free capital flows (but not an independent 
monetary policy because setting a domestic interest rate that is different from 
the world interest rate would undermine a stable exchange rate due to 
appreciation or depreciation pressure on the domestic currency). 
ii) “B”: An independent monetary policy and free capital flows (but not a stable 
exchange rate). 
iii) “C”: A stable exchange rate and independent monetary policy (but no free 
capital flows, which would require the use of capital controls). 
The theory of the impossible trinity is that a country can't achieve A+B+C at the 
same time. Any country that attempts this is doomed to fail. That's the crux of the 
theory. Mundell was of the view that the effects of monetary and fiscal policy in 
an open economy depend on capital mobility. In particular, he has highlighted the 
importance of exchange r ate systems. Under floating exchange rates, monetary 
policy is a powerful tool; fiscal policy is powerless. Under fixed exchange rates, 
fiscal policy is effective.  
Check Your Progress 1 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  What do you mean by impossible trinity? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Describe the main components of the Mundell-Fleming model. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Explain the process involved in the Mundell-Fleming model.  
 …………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
