--- Page 47 ---
 
 
 
99 
India and 
Multilateral Trading 
System 
cuts in overall tr ade distorting support (OTDS), percentage of products to be 
declared as sensitive products, tariff rate quota expansion for such products, tariff 
capping, special products, and the Special Safeguards Mechanism (SSM), have 
persisted. The developing countries, led by India, have been raising their concern 
regarding non-adherence to free and fair trade through high agricultural subsidies 
by the developed nations like the USA. India has remained vocal that this 
Uruguay Round commitment must be resolved first to  take the negotiations 
further. On the other hand, the developed countries argue that the developing 
countries, particularly India, have delayed the talks on agriculture. The 
differences cropped up on two major issues – agricultural subsidies and SSM. 
15.6.1.1 Subsidies 
India’s position in agriculture has been predominantly defensive. Like other 
developing nations, India seeks to maintain agricultural self -sufficiency. Hence, 
it has remained reluctant in making concessions that may potentially harm its 
national interests. At the same time India has been demanding reductions in 
trade-distorting domestic support from the governments of the developed WTO 
members, particularly the EU and the USA. The developing countries argue that 
subsidies maintained and conti nued by the developed countries amounts to non -
adherence to the WTO principle of free and fair trade. Continuous subsidies are 
instrumental in generating inefficiencies that would raise the global food prices in 
the long-run. The developed countries tried to bypass that by moving away from 
blue box subsidies to amber and green box subsidies. India argued that, on the 
principle of reciprocity, the developed nations can’t ask for reduction of tariffs or 
other restrictions that the developing countries impose to counter the high 
agricultural subsidies given by the developed nations. Thus, before further 
negotiations, the developed countries must give up/ reduce agricultural subsidies, 
which would free agricultural prices from any distortion and then would refle ct 
production costs, and hence, efficiency. Without that happening, the developing 
countries remain unable to export the commodities in which they have 
comparative advantage. 
15.6.1.2 Special Safeguard Mechanism 
The Special Safeguard Mechanism (SSM)would a llow developing countries to 
temporarily raise tariffs beyond current legal limits when import volumes 
increase or prices fall suddenly. However, how much developing countries would 
be allowed to raise tariffs beyond current 'bound' levels to protect domes tic 
producers remains the bone of contention. India and China pushed for more 
flexible terms for the use of the SSM, while the US was firm in its stand for 
predictable market access for its farm products. Agriculture contributes to almost 
16% of India’s GD P and 60% of employment. Most of India’s agricultural 
workforce members are subsistence farmers working on very small land holdings 
(less than 2 acres); many are not even landowners and mere sharecroppers. 
Moreover, India’s agriculture remains vulnerable n ot only to domestic climatic 


--- Page 48 ---
 
 
 
100 
Globalisation conditions but also to international prices. Thus, a small increase in agricultural 
imports could affect the lives of millions. Hence, India argued that SSM is 
necessary to insulate Indian farmers from the sudden decline in int ernational 
prices or surge in import volumes of agricultural commodities.  
15.6.2  Non-Agricultural Market Access 
Non-Agricultural Market Access (NAMA) refers to trade in industrial products. 
Under NAMA, reduction of tariffs and non -tariff barriers in trad e of industrial 
products such as rubber products, glassware, textiles, etc. have been negotiated in 
the WTO rounds and ministerial conferences with the Uruguay Round being the 
most successful one. But peak tariffs continued in a number of goods. Thus, talk s 
under NAMA were taken up during the Doha round of WTO negotiations.The 
developed countries argued that most tariff cuts in industrial goods should be 
taken up by the developing countries as tariffs in the developed countries were 
already very low due to the GATT legacy.  
On the other hand, the developing countries, including India, argued that they had 
the right to maintain above average tariffs under the WTO's Special and Different 
Treatment provision. As Kathuria (2010) points out, India, along with nin e other 
developing nations proposed the following –  
• Developing countries should be provided flexibility in keeping domestically 
sensitive tariff lines as unbound. 
• Elimination of tariffs should not be applicable to them as they need to use 
tariff as an instrument of industrial policy and as revenue generating source to 
meet developmental expenditure. 
• For using linear formula of tariff reduction, India suggested a coefficient of 
0.5 for developed countries and 0.33 for developing countries. 
• To tackle high tariff peaks, no bound tariff line shall have a tariff exceeding 3 
times the average of all bound tariffs in its tariff schedule. However, some 
flexibility should be given to developing countries for sensitive tariff lines. 
• Implementation period should be  5 years for developed countries and 10 
years for developing countries. 
• All non ad valorem duties should be converted into ad valorem equivalent, 
allowing developing countries to retain 3 per cent of their tariff lines with non 
ad valorem rates. 
• Developed countries shall provide Duty Free Quota Free access for all 
products of LDCs. 
15.6.3  Non-trade Related Issues 
Starting from the Singapore Issues (elaborated in Unit 13) like investment, 
government procurement and government policy, India has continuously voiced 


--- Page 49 ---
 
 
 
101 
India and 
Multilateral Trading 
System 
dissatisfaction over linking non -trade issues in WTO.India has vehemently 
opposed against linking trade and labour standards. India has also opposed the 
use of environmental issues as means of protectionism. It has been argued that 
through these issues the developed countries try to keep the developing countries 
on their toes and divert their limited resources and time. 
15.6.4  Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 
The Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights  
(TRIPS) was introduced during the Uruguay Round of the GATT. Like all the 
developing economies, India believed that TRIPS was meant for gains to the 
developed nations and not for the developing countries. TRIPS mandated the 
developing countries to reform their IPR regimes so as to synchronize them with 
those of developed countries over time. As was the case then, most of the 
existing patents/trademarks/copyrights were held by the developed countries. 
Thus, strict implementation of TRIPS would render the de veloping countries 
incapable of producing a number of commodities in a profitable manner, thus 
perpetuating the comparative advantage of the developed economies in them. 
This would lead to unequal exchange between North –South trading partners 
which would fail the objective of the WTO. Strengthening IPR protection would 
increase patent holders' monopoly power and result in significant losses, 
especially in the short run. This would also lead to closure of local firms engaged 
in production of foreign imitati on goods in the developing countries. Moreover, 
the impact of strict implementation of TRIPS on technology transfer was 
ambiguous. The few clauses on facilitation of technology transfer that TRIPS 
contained were vague. 
The developing countries were apprehensive about the impact of TRIPS on 
domestic pharmaceutical industries and, hence, on the health care sector. Taking 
due cognizance of this, the Doha round accepted that TRIPS should not stop or 
prevent members in any wa y from taking measures to protect public health. It 
also pointed the flexibilities available to members under TRIPS.TRIPS only 
authorized domestic production under compulsory licensing and not imports from 
third parties. This would have dealt a severe blow  on the health sector of a nation 
with inadequate manufacturing capacity in the pharmaceutical sector. To fix this 
issue, the 2001 Declaration called on the TRIPS Council to find an “expeditious 
solution” to this problem. That solution was agreed to by WTO members and was 
announced on the eve of the Cancún Ministerial meeting in 2003. The solution 
given was – the domestic market requirement of compulsory licensing was 
waived and least developed countries, as well as to those countries that lacked 
sufficient manufacturing capacity, were permitted to use compulsory  licensing to 
import pharmaceuticals for “HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and other 
epidemics” from third parties (Saggi, 2012).  
However, India had to sign the TRIPs in 1994 as not signing TRIPs wo uld have 
implied India opting out of WTO. By 2005, India had reformed its IPR regime to 


--- Page 50 ---
 
 
 
102 
Globalisation get it in line TRIPs agreement. In fact, presently, India is an important player in 
pharmaceutical in the global economy.  
Check Your Progress 2 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Briefly discuss India’s transformation from GATT to WTO. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Highlight India’s contribution in WTO in relation to agriculture sector. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) What is India’s contribution in WTO with respect to trade related aspects of 
Intellectual Property Rights? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
15.7  THE WAY FORWARD 
The US backtracked from its commitment to discuss agricultural issues in the 
11th Ministerial Conference of the WTO held in Buenos Aires, Argentina during 
10-13 December 2017. As discussed earlier, that agriculture has remained a 
prime concern for India, the talks collapsed. The developed countries pushed for 
initiating discussions on issues like investment facilitation, gender, micro, small 
& medium enterprises (MSMEs) and e -commerce which the developing 
countries opposed. Some developed nations also opposed that India and China no 
longer deserve special treatment under the ‘Special an d Differential Treatment’ 
provision. 
In the aftermath of the failed negotiations, India held an informal mini Ministerial 
Conference in New Delhi, India during 19 -20 March, 2018.Delegates from 
almost 52 countries including WTO chairman Roberto Azevedo and trade 
ministers from seven countries including Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Nepal, 
Russia, Singapore and South Africa participated. The main aim of the conference 
was to break the deadlock in negotiations.  
This meeting was historical for India and its role in  WTO. India had been 
accused of being obstructionist for India’s unflinching stand to protect the 
interests of the developing nations. With this meeting, India had shed that 
criticism and had embarked on the role of a facilitator. This was a very important  
development. Over the last decade or so, India has emerged as a prominent player 


--- Page 51 ---
 
 
 
103 
India and 
Multilateral Trading 
System 
in the world economic system. Hence, it is imperative that its bargaining power 
in the WTO would enhance further in the coming days. India’s emerging 
negotiating capability, coupled with the role of a facilitator would play a pivotal 
role in the future of the WTO and the multilateral trading system as a whole. 
15.8  LET US SUM UP 
In this unit , we discussed the characteristics, evolution and future prospects of 
India’s RTAs and  multilateral agreements. We also analysed India's role in the 
GATT and the WTO so far and the future prospects of India in the multilateral 
trading system. We started with a brief discussion on the different RTAs that 
India has with other nations at present. Then we analysed the evolution and major 
characteristics of each of India’s major multilateral relationships. In the next 
section we introduced India’s negotiations in the WTO followed by the issues in 
which India took active role in the WTO. Finally, we discussed present initiatives 
taken by India to resolve the WTO deadlocks and the possible role that India may 
play in the multilateral trading system in future. 
15.9  KEY WORDS 
APTA The Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement is the oldest 
RTA joined by India. APTA is the oldest 
preferential trade agreement between countries 
in the Asia-Pacific region. 
Doha round The latest and most critical round of WTO 
negotiation. 
GATT General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. An 
agreement signed by 23 countries to initiate 
multilateral trade liberalization. 
GSTP The Agreement on the Global System of Trade 
Preferences among Developing Countries was 
formed as a preferential trade agreement (PTA) 
with the aim of increasing trade between 
developing countries in the framework of the 
UNCTAD in 1988. 
Multilateralism Reciprocal agreements between multiple 
countries aiming at a common goal, in 
particular, freer and fairer trade. 
NAMA Non-Agricultural Market Access refers to trade 
in industrial products. 
Regionalism Reciprocal agreements between two or more 
countries which may or may not belong to the 
same geographical neighbourhood. 


--- Page 52 ---
 
 
 
104 
Globalisation SAFTA The South Asian Free Trade Area is an FTA 
between the seven SAARC cou ntries - 
Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, 
Pakistan and Sri Lanka. 
SSM The Special Safeguard Mechanism is a tool that 
would allow developing countries to raise 
tariffs temporarily beyond current legal limits 
when import volumes increase or prices  fall 
suddenly. 
TRIPS The Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of 
Intellectual Property Rights mandated the 
developing countries to reform their IPR 
regimes so as to synchronize them with those of 
developed countries over time. 
Uruguay Round The final round of GATT negotiation that gave 
birth to WTO. 
WTO World Trade Organization. WTO is a 
supranational organization of 164 member 
nations that regulates international trade. 
15.10 SOME USEFUL REFERENCES 
Agarwal, M. and S. Ghosh (2017). The Effect of RTAs on India’s Trade . In M. 
Agarwal, J. Wang and J. Whalley (Eds.) China and India: The International 
Context and Economic Growth, Manufacturing Performance and Rural 
Development. Singapore: World Scientific. 
Kathuria, M. (2010). Doha Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations - Critical 
Issues in Trade Development pertaining to India. RBI.  
https://rbi.org.in/scripts/PublicationReportDetails.aspx?UrlPage=&ID=589 
Saggi, K. (2012). India at the WTO: From Uruguay to Doha and Beyond . In C. 
Ghate (Ed.) Oxford Handbook of the Indian Economy. Oxford University Press. 
15.11 ANSWERS/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES  
Check Your Progress 1 
1) See Section 15.3 
2) See sub-section 15.3.3 
3) See sub-section 15.3.5 


--- Page 53 ---
 
 
 
105 
India and 
Multilateral Trading 
System 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) See Section 15.4 
2) See sub-section 15.6.1 
3) See sub-section 15.6.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
