--- Page 20 ---
 
 
 
72 
Globalisation 
UNIT 14  REGIONAL TRADING AGREEMENTS 
Structure 
14.0 Objectives 
14.1 Introduction 
14.2 Basic Characteristics of Regional Trading Agreements  
14.3 Types of Regional Trading Agreements 
14.3.1 Preferential Trading Arrangements 
14.3.2 Free Trade Area 
14.3.3 Customs Union 
14.3.4 Common Market 
14.3.5 Economic and Monetary Union 
14.4 A Brief History of Evolution of Regional Trading Agreements 
14.5 Gains from Regional Trading Agreements 
14.5.1 Static Gains 
14.5.2 Dynamic Gains 
14.6 Equilibrium Structure of Regional Trading Agreements 
14.6.1 Horizontal Expansion 
14.6.2 Vertical Expansion 
14.6.3 Simultaneous Expansion 
14.6.4 Address Game 
14.7 Let us Sum Up 
14.8 Key Words 
14.9 Suggested References 
14.10 Answers/Hints to Check your Progress Exercises 
14.0  OBJECTIVES 
After studying this Unit, you should be able to:  
 explain the concept of regional trading agreements; 
 enlist the basic characteristics of a regional trading agreement; 
 explain the different types of regional trading agreements depending on  the 
degree of economic cooperation; 
 describe the evolution of regional trading agreements in the world; 
 discuss and analyze the various  gains countries have after forming/joining a 
regional trading agreement; and 
 justify why regional trading agreements change over time. 
                                                 
 Contributed by  Dr. Sunandam Ghosh, Centre for Development Studies, Kerala  


--- Page 21 ---
 
 
 
73 
Regional Trading 
Agreements 14.1   INTRODUCTION 
In this unit we will discuss about Regional Trading Agreements (RTAs). RTAs 
are reciprocal agreements between two or more countries (or trading partners). 
Hence, one can easily understand that RTAs can be either bilateral (two 
members) or multilateral (more than two members). The member countries of an 
RTA may or may not belong to the same geographical neighbourhood.  
In this unit we shall first discuss the basic characteristics of RTAs. Next, we will 
discuss the different types of RTAs depending on the degree of economic 
cooperation among the member countries. The next section will briefly discuss 
the evolution of RTAs in the world economic system. After that we will spend 
some time understanding the reasons for which countries form RTAs –
 that is, 
the gains that the member countries experience due to formation of an RTA 
among them. The last section would provide a brief discussion on the equilibrium 
structure of an RTA.  
14.2  BASIC CHARACTERISTICS OF REGIONAL 
TRADING AGREEMENTS 
Since 1990s,  there has been an unprecedented proliferation of RTAs being 
reported to the World Trade Organization (WTO). As in March, 2018, there are 
304 RTAs being reported in the WTO of which only 53 were in force before 
1993. The RTAs in the world trading system consist of a motley assortment of 
bilateral and multilateral trade agreements. Further, such proliferation of RTAs 
has been going on simultaneously with the WTO rounds of multilateral 
negotiations as discussed in the previous unit. However, this might appear 
counter-intuitive. The primary objective of RTAs is freer trade among member 
countries coupled with unified trade policies vis-à-vis non-member. Thus, RTAs 
exhibit a mix of cooperation among members and discrimination against non-
members. This directly co nflicts with the WTO’s ultimate goal of global free 
trade. 
Economic integration is the process of reduction or abolition of tariff and non-
tariff trade barriers coupled with unified economic policies, particularly, trade 
policies. As discussed earlier, RTAs are reciprocal agreements between two or 
more trading partners that determine the extent of economic integration between 
the member countries. Thus, RTAs are discriminatory in nature in that member 
countries of an RTA reduce or eliminate tariff and non-tariff barriers for trade 
between the member countries but not for countries that are not members of the 
RTA. Now, the WTO is committed to the goal of global free trade and to the 
principle of non-discrimination among the WTO member countries. Any WTO 
signatory country cannot impose higher tariffs for one WTO member country 
while reducing the same for another. However, RTAs are exception to this 
principle. Interestingly, all WTO signatories are members of at least one RTA. 


--- Page 22 ---
 
 
 
74 
Globalisation This has led to many overlapping memberships, resulting in a “spaghetti bowl” of 
bilateral and multilateral trade agreements. For example, India has bilateral 
agreements with Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand while having a separate 
agreement with the ASEAN.  
14.3  TYPES OF REGIONAL TRADING 
AGREEMENTS 
In this section we will first describe the different types of RTAs depending on the 
degree of economic cooperation among the member countries of an RTA. Jacob 
Viner (1950) conceived five stages of economic cooperation among member 
countries. One must note that these stages indicate successively higher degrees of 
economic cooperation. 
14.3.1  Preferential Trading Arrangements 
The lowest form of economic cooperation is a Preferential Trading Arrangement 
(PTA). The members of a PTA lower their respective tariff rates and other non-
tariff barriers on their mutual trade. However, the member countries keep the 
import tariffs and other non-tariff barriers vis-à-vis non-member countries. India 
has PTAs with Afghanistan, Chile, Nepal and Thailand.  
Sometimes the member countries altogether abolish the import tariffs and non-
tariff barriers but on a subset of commodities and not on all goods traded among 
them. This is known as Partial Scope Agreement (PSA). The Belize-Guatemala 
PSA covers only 150 specified commodities. 
PTA is the weakest form of economic cooperation among countries. The member 
countries take their trade policies vis-à-vis non-member countries unilaterally. 
14.3.2  Free Trade Area 
The next higher stage of economic cooperation is a Free Trade Area (FTA). The 
member countries of an FTA remove all tariffs and non-tariff barriers on imports 
from each other. Each member country retains its independence in establishing 
trading policies with non-members. In other words, the members of an FTA can 
maintain individual tariffs and other non-tariff barriers on the rest of the world. 
This arrangement is usually assumed to apply to all products between member 
countries, but it can sometime involve a mix of free trade in some goods and 
preferential, but still protected, treatment in other goods with the idea of 
abolishing the remaining trade barriers over time.  
The most prominent FTAs in the world are the North American Free Trade Area 
(NAFTA) formed between Canada, Mexico and the USA in 1994 and the 
Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) formed between Indonesia, 
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand on 8 th August, 1967 followed 
by accession of Brunei, Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar and Vietnam between 1984 


--- Page 23 ---
 
 
 
75 
Regional Trading 
Agreements and 1999. India has FTAs with ASEAN, Bhutan, Japan, Malaysia, SAFTA, 
Singapore, South Korea and Sri Lanka. 
One interesting issue that can arise in the presence of FTAs is that of 
transshipment. When each member country sets its own external tariff, non-
member countries may find it profitable to export a product to the member 
country with the lowest level of outside protection and then through it to other 
member countries whose protection levels against the outside world are higher. 
But without rules of origin by members regarding the source country of a 
product, there is nothing to preclude non-member countries from using this 
transshipment strategy to escape some of the trade restrictions in the more highly 
protected member countries. This has led to formation of FTAs containing rules 
of origin clauses. Rules of Origin (RoO) are used to determine the country from 
where a product has originated. There are two types of RoO –
 preferential and 
non-preferential. The exact rules vary from country to country and RTA to RTA. 
A recent development in FTA is the introduction of Economic Integration Area 
(EIA) which covers FTAs in Services. Members of the WTO signed General 
Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) in 1995, covering the rules for trading 
in services. FTAs in services allow for lower barriers and agreements on trade in 
services. India signed an EIA with the ASEAN in 2010.  
14.3.3  Customs Union 
The third stage of economic cooperation is Customs Union (CU). Apart from free 
trade among member countries, the members of a Customs Union adopt a 
common external trade policy toward non-members including, but not limited to, 
a common external tariff (CET) vis-à-vis the rest of the world. The CET is set 
either through joint welfare maximization or through delegation. The member 
nations give up independence in setting national welfare maximizing unilateral 
tariffs or non-tariff barriers. The group acts as one body in the negotiation of al l 
trade agreements with non-members. Thus, the problem of transshipment, as 
discussed earlier, does not arise in case of a Customs Union.  
BENELUX, established in 1958, is the first CU in the world formed between 
Belgium, Netherlands and Luxembourg. Recent examples of CUs are the East 
African Community (EAC) formed between Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania 
and Uganda in 2000; the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) formed between 
Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic and the Russian Federation in 
2015 and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) formed between Bahrain, 
Kingdom of Kuwait, the State of Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United 
Arab Emirates in 2003. 


--- Page 24 ---
 
 
 
76 
Globalisation 14.3.4  Common Market 
The next stage of economic cooperation is Common Market. In this stage apart 
from free trade of goods among member countries, the countries allow for free 
movement of factors of production among the members. At this stage the 
member states move from free trade in goods to free factor trade.  
Most prominent examples of Common Markets are Southern Common Market 
(MERCOSUR) formed between Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay in 
1991; Caribbean Community and Common Market (CARICOM) formed 
between Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, 
Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Montserrat, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint 
Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago in 1973 and 
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) formed between 
Angola, Burundi, Comoros, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi, 
Mauritius, Rwanda, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia and 
Zimbabwe in 1994. 
14.3.5  Economic and Monetary Union  
The ultimate stage of economic cooperation is an Economic and Monetary Union 
(EMU). At this stage of economic cooperation, the member countries unify their 
monetary and fiscal policies. Hence, the degree of economic cooperation moves 
beyond the domain of international trade and transcends into domestic policy 
making. These members may or may not have a common currency. The first ever 
EMU was formed in 1921 between Belgium and Luxembourg. In the present 
world the most celebrated example of EMU is the European Union (EU) that 
launched the common currency Euro among the 15 members on 1 st January, 
1999. Currently 19 out of 28 EU members use Euro as their common currency 
creating the Eurozone. While separate political entities are still present, an EMU 
generally establishes several supranational institutions whose decisions are 
binding upon all members.  While this level of economic integration is often 
aspired to, member countries find it extraordinarily difficult to give up the 
domestic sovereignty the scheme requires. Giving up autonomy in monetary 
policy is also a concern.
  
Check Your Progress 1 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  What are the characteristics of Regional Trading Agreements? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 


--- Page 25 ---
 
 
 
77 
Regional Trading 
Agreements 2) Enlist various types of RTAs.  
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Briefly discuss the Free Trade Area as one of the stages of economic 
cooperation.  
 …………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
14.4 A BRIEF HISTORY OF EVOLUTION OF 
REGIONAL TRADING AGREEMENTS 
In this section, we will briefly discuss the evolution of RTAs. The post-World 
War regionalism can be divided into to two distinct phases. The first phase began 
in the late 1950s and continued till the 1970s. The second phase began with the 
wave of globalization in the 1990s. As discussed earlier, only 53 out of present 
day 304 RTAs were in force till 1993. 
First Phase: One can assume the beginning of the first phase of regionalism with 
the formation of the European Coal and Steel Community when the Treaty of 
Paris was signed by Belgium, France, West Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, and 
the Netherlands in 1951 followed by the signing of the Treaty of Rome in 1957 
leading to the formation of the European Economic Community (EEC) and the 
European Atomic Energy Commission (Euratom). Thus, the beginning of this 
phase of regionalism had its root in Europe's push for continental integration. The 
ultimate objective was the formation “of an integrated market for the free 
movement of goods, services, capital, and people. The EEC was eventually 
transformed into the European Union with the Maastricht Treaty in 1993. In 
2004, the EU gave accession to Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, 
Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia. Following the ECC 
example, The East African countries of Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda established 
the East African Community (EAC) in 1967. The first wave of regionalism was 
characterized by increase in economic cooperation. National welfare conditions 
were the most dominant force for regionalism. However, the regionalism in the 
second phase was driven by economic reasons other than national welfare.  
Second Phase : This phase of regionalism started in the late 1980s. Only 53 
RTAs were in force till 1993. This number shot up 230 by the end of 2003. This 
second phase of regionalism has been identified as “Contemporary Regionalism” 
(Ethier, 2011) a s compared to “Traditional Regionalism” of the first phase. In 
fact, the type of regionalism in the second phase signifies deeper integration. As 


--- Page 26 ---
 
 
 
78 
Globalisation Ethier (2011) points out, the trading pattern in this period can be distinguished 
from the previous period in the following ways –  
1) Multilateral liberalization of trade in manufactured goods among industrial 
nations is more complete than it was.  
2) A large number of small countries have abandoned their anti-market, closed 
economies policies and adopted reforms that will permit them to join the 
multilateral trading system.  
3) Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is more prominent than it was in the first 
phase, with small countries undertaking reforms competing for it. 
4) There is now much more fragmentation in the production process with 
different stages of production taking place in different countries, i.e., the 
world is now much more globalized. 
Unlike gains from trade through RTA formation in the first phase, the production 
gains through FDI and modular production was given higher emphasis in the 
second phase of regionalism. Ethier (2011) argues that this type of regionalism 
involves one or more small countries competing with each other in terms of 
reforms to link up with a large country. A small country undertakes reforms and 
liberalizes its trade regime whereas modifications by the larger partner are 
modest. Further, the loss of staying outside an RTA became a significant factor 
during this phase of regionalism. RTAs now involve not just reduction of tariffs 
or non-tariff barriers; but also aim at a greater harmonization of broader 
economic policies. Thus this period witnessed a number of countries, 
predominantly the developing one, liberalizing unilaterally. India’s unilateral 
liberalization in 1991 is a classic example. Traditionally, RTAs covered tariff 
liberalization and rules related to standard, quality and rules of origin only. 
However, in the recent times RTAs have moved to include liberalization of 
services’ trade, investments, intellectual property rights etc. 
14.5 GAINS FROM REGIONAL TRADING 
AGREEMENTS 
The gains cannot occur if a country unilaterally reduces tariffs. A country is 
better off by reducing/abolishing import tariffs and other non-tariff barriers only 
when the trading partner reciprocates. Gains through forming or joining an RTA 
are materialized as that ensures a mutual reduction in tariffs and reciprocal 
market access.  
14.5.1  Static Gains 
Now, gains from forming an RTA can be static (immediate) or dynamic (over 
time). Under “Traditional Regionalism” as propounded by Viner (1950), there 
are primarily three types of static gains. 
 


--- Page 27 ---
 
 
 
79 
Regional Trading 
Agreements Trade Creation : Trade creation is the outcome of economic integration that 
leads to shifting a product's origin from an inefficient domestic producer to an 
efficient producer located in a member country of the RTA. In other words, a 
member country will import the goods produced more efficiently in another 
country. This releases scarce resources in the domestic economy which are 
reallocated to the production of goods in which the domestic country has 
comparative advantage.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14.1: Trade Creation 
Assume two countries (A and B) forming an RTA between them. Before the 
economic integration, the price of the good in country A is Rs.150 (Rs. 100 in 
country B plus the 50% tariff). With integration between A and B, the tariff is 
removed, and A now imports 150 units (250 - 100) rather than 40 units  
(200 - 160) from B. 60 units (160 - 100) of the increased imports displace 
previous home production, and 50 units (250 - 200) reflect the greater 
consumption at the new Rs. 100 price facing country A’s consumers . The net 
welfare impact is the sum of the triangles “b”  and “d”, or Rs. [( 
 
      )  
( 
 
      )]  = Rs. 2750. Hence, the result is unambiguously positive. Trade 
creation results in gains through comparative advantage. 
Trade Diversion:  Trade diversion happens when the origin of production is 
shifted from an efficient non-member country to an inefficient member country. 
The welfare effect of trade diversion is ambiguous. The inefficient exporting 
member country gains for sure. However, the importing member country’s  
welfare change is ambiguous. Here, we will present a case where the welfare 
change of the importing member actually decreases. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 14.2: Trade Diversion 
250 
 Quantity  
Price 
100 
SA 
c 
a 
 b 
150 
160 
 200 
D
A 
d 
0 
100 
PB 
PA = PB (1+t) 
 
PB 
200 
 Quantity  
Price 
100 
SA 
c 
a 
b 
150 
180 
DA 
d 
0 
100 
PA = PC (1+t) 
 
120 
130 
PC 
e 


--- Page 28 ---
 
 
 
80 
Globalisation Assume that two countries (A and B) form an RTA between them. Before the 
formation of the RTA, A used to impose 50% tariff on its imports. The tariff 
inclusive price of A’s imports from another country C was Rs. 150 and A used to 
import 50 units (180 – 130) from C. The tariff inclusive price of B’s exports to A 
was Rs. 180 per unit (not shown). Now, after forming an RTA with B, A stops 
imposing tariff on imports from B but continues to impose tariff on imports fro m 
C. Hence, the price at which B exports to A (without tariff) is Rs. 120. At this 
price A imports 100 units (200 – 100) from B. A’s welfare increases by the 
triangles “b” and “d” (due to lower prices of imports) and decreases by the 
rectangle “e” (loss of tariff revenue as A charges no tariff now). Hence, net 
change in welfare of A is =  (   )     
= Rs.  ( 
       )  (  
 
    
  )  (     )  =  Rs. 250. 
Reduction in Smuggling: Another immediate gain that countries forming an 
RTA would experience is reduction in illegal trade (smuggling). Let’s assume 
that two countries (A and B) form an RTA. Before the formation of the RTA, A 
used to impose an import tariff of say 50% on its imports from B. Suppose the 
price of commodity was Rs. 100 in B and, with tariff, Rs. 150 in A. This 
differences in the price of the same good in two countries can generate illegal 
trade (smuggling) where any person can buy the good at Rs. 100 per unit in B 
and illegally sale that good at any price less than Rs. 150 in A (suppose Rs. 135) 
and making a profit of Rs. 15 per unit by smuggling. Once, A and B form an 
RTA, the tariff would disappear and the commodity would cost Rs. 100 in bot h 
countries. Thus, the possibility of smuggling vanishes. 
14.5.2  Dynamic Gains 
Apart from these above-mentioned static gains from formation of RTAs, there 
are several dynamic gains. These gains are not realized immediately, but these 
gains accrue to the member countries over time. Some of these gains are 
discussed below –
  
The establishment of RTAs creates a competitive environment and reduces 
monopoly powers that might exist before. The export sector can enjoy economies 
of scale. This might happen due to two reasons. First, as RTAs are formed, tariffs 
are reduced/ abolished. This enables efficient producers located in other member 
countries to export and the domestic country reallocates its resources to its own 
export sector and that sector expands. Second, economies of scale might also 
occur due to lowering of the prices of intermediate goods required for production 
and thus reducing the marginal cost of production. After an RTA is formed, all 
the member countries get enlarged market for their produces. Larger markets lead 
to larger scale production through division of labour which in turn raises 
productivity of labourers. Economic integration reduces transportation and 
transaction costs. This leads to efficient relocation of resources enhancing 
agglomeration effects. Environmental issues can also be tackled more 
efficiently through formation of RTAs. For example, one country may offer 
