--- Page 37 ---
 
 
 
89 
India and 
Multilateral Trading 
System 
15.0  OBJECTIVES 
After studying this Unit, you should be able to:  
• discuss the different RTAs that India has at present; 
• elaborate the different multilateral trade agreements that India has at present; 
• explain the transformation of India’s role over time from GATT to WTO; 
• analyze different issues in which India took an active role in the WTO; and 
• explain the role that India may play in the WTO in the coming days. 
15.1   INTRODUCTION 
In Units 13 and 14 we have discussed in detail about Multilateral Trade 
Negotiations (MTNs) and Regional Trading Agreements (RTAs). In this Unit we 
will focus our discussions on India’s experience in negotiating both RTAs and 
MTNs. As argued in earlier uni ts 13 and 14, the world looks like a “spaghetti 
bowl” of regional and multilateral agreements. India’s experience is no different. 
India was a member of the GATT since 8 July 1948 and a founder member of the 
WTO since 1 January 1995. Moreover, India has be en a founder member of the 
Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement (APTA), the oldest RTA in the Asia -Pacific 
region. Further, India has bilateral RTAs with a number of countries like Japan, 
Malaysia, Singapore, South Korea, Australia, UAE  along with most of the 
nations with which India shares its border. Though India doesn’t have a direct 
agreement with China, both these nations are members of the APTA. Thus, one 
might understand that India’s trade relations are beyond geographical 
neighbourhood – it has RTA with ne xt door neighbor Bhutan on the one hand 
and with Chile (the distance between the two is more than 16,000 km), on the 
other. 
We will start with a brief discussion on India's different RTAs with other nations. 
In the next section we would analyze the evoluti on and major characteristics of 
each of India’s major multilateral relationships. The next section would introduce 
us to the evolution of India’s negotiations in the WTO followed by the issues in 
which India took active role in the WTO in the next section.  Finally, we would 
spend some time understanding the present initiatives taken by India to resolve 
the WTO deadlocks.  
15.2  INDIA’S TRADE AGREEMENTS: AN 
OVERVIEW 
In this section we discuss the trade agreements negotiated by India so far. 
Though there has been a massive proliferation of Regional Trading Agreements 
(RTAs) in the world, India’s trade negotiations started only very recently. Except 
for the Bangkok Agreement of 1975, India started signing RTAs only in 
2003with MERCOSUR (Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay) and Afghanistan. 


--- Page 38 ---
 
 
 
90 
Globalisation  
India has entered into several trading arrangements. Some of these RTAS are free 
trade areas (FTAs), some are FTAs and Economic Integration Agreements 
(EIAs) whereas others are preferential Scope Agreements ( PSAs). The various 
types of RTAs have been discussed in details in Unit 14. Table 1 5.1 gives a brief 
summary of all these agreements. 
These agreements have almost all been signed since 2003. While the Bangkok 
Agreement (BA) had been negotiated in 1975 by 7 de veloping countries, namely, 
Bangladesh, India, Cambodia, The Philippines, Republic of Korea, Sri Lanka and 
Thailand, it had been ratified/implemented by only four countries - India, 
Bangladesh, Republic of Korea and Sri Lanka. The agreement was energized 
with the accession of China in 2002. It was renamed as the Asia -Pacific Trade 
Agreement (APTA) in 2005 and renegotiated in 2006. 
Table 15.1: India’s Regional Trading Arrangements 
RTA Name Present Members Date of Entry in to 
Force 
India APTA PSA Bangladesh, China, India, Lao PDR, 
Mongolia, South Korea, Sri Lanka 
17th June, 1976 
India-Sri Lanka FTA  India and Sri Lanka 17th June, 2002 
India-Afghanistan PSA India and Afghanistan 13th May, 2003 
SAFTA Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, 
Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka 
6th January, 2004 
India-ASEAN FTA Cambodia, Brunei Darussalam, India, 
Indonesia, Lao PDR, Malaysia, 
Myanmar, Singapore, Thailand, The 
Philippines and Viet Nam 
1st July 2004 
India-Thailand PSA India and Thailand 1st September, 2004 
India-Singapore FTA & EIA India and Singapore 1st August, 2005 
India-Chile PSA India and Chile 17th August, 2007 
India-Bhutan FTA India and Bhutan 30th June, 2008 
India-MERCOSUR PSA India, Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay and 
Paraguay 
1st June, 2009 
India-Nepal PSA India and Nepal 27th October, 2009 
India-South Korea FTA & EIA India and  South Korea  1st January, 2010 
India-Malaysia FTA & EIA India and Malaysia 1st July, 2011 
India-Japan FTA & EIA India and Japan 1st August, 2011 
India-UAE Comprehensive 
Economic Partnership 
Agreement (CEPA) 
India and UAE 1st May 2022 
India -Australia Economic 
Cooperation and Trade 
Agreement (ECTA) 
India and Australia   29 December 2022 
 
Source: Adapted from Agarwal and Ghosh (2016) 


--- Page 39 ---
 
 
 
91 
India and 
Multilateral Trading 
System 
 
India’s late entry into negotiating RTAs is likely a reflection of India’s 
geographically diversified trade portfolio. Hence, India benefits more from 
multilateral trade liberalization rather than RTAs. Interestingly, among all the 
RTAs of India, India’s F TAs with ASEAN and SAFTA and PSAs with APTA 
and MERCOSUR are multilateral negotiations. Presently, RTAs with the Gulf 
Cooperation Council, Canada, UK, EU and New Zealand are being negotiated. 
Negotiations with the EU for a Bilateral Trade and Investment Ag reement were 
initiated in 2007 got stalled after 15 rounds of negotiations, the last round being 
held in 2013. India and the 27-nation bloc resumed negotiations on June 17,2022 
year after a gap of over eight years on the proposed agreements on trade, 
investments and Geographical Indications (GI). The  fourth round of talks for a 
comprehensive free trade agreement concluded in May, 2023 in Brussels, a move 
aimed at further strengthening economic ties between the two sides. India and the 
UK have been negotiating an FTA since January,  2022, with a goal towards a 
comprehensive pact that is expected to significantly enhance the bilater al trading 
relationship between India and the UK.  India is also negotiating on 
Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreements (CECAs) for deeper 
integration with the ASEAN, Finland, Japan, Korea and Malaysia.  
15.3  INDIA’S MULTILATERAL TRADE 
AGREEMENTS 
As discussed in the last section, India has signed a number of multilateral trade 
agreements since 1975. In this section , we will describe the evolution of each of 
these negotiations. In particular, we would discuss the ASEAN -India FTA, 
SAFTA, APTA, India-Mercosur PSA, and GSTP. 
15.3.1  Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement (APTA) 
The Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement (APTA) is the oldest RTA joined by India. 
APTA is the oldest preferential trade agreement between countries in the Asia -
Pacific region. It was s igned by Bangladesh, India, Cambodia, The Philippines, 
Republic of Korea, Sri Lanka and Thailand as the Bangkok Agreement (BA) in 
1975. However, it was ratified only by Bangladesh, India, Republic of Korea and 
Sri Lanka. The Bangkok Agreement was renamed a s the Asia -Pacific Trade 
Agreement (APTA) on 2 ndNovember, 2005 at the First Session of the Ministerial 
Council of the Bangkok Agreement. The present members of APTA are 
Bangladesh, China, India, Lao PDR, Mongolia, Republic of Korea and Sri Lanka. 
China was offered accession into the APTA in 2001. Mongolia is the last nation 
to be acceded into the APTA in 2013.   
APTA was formed to hasten economic development in the participating nations 
through trade and investment liberalization. The Third Round Tariff Concessions 
under APTA, which entered into force on 1 September 2006, led to tariff 


--- Page 40 ---
 
 
 
92 
Globalisation concessions on more than 4,0 00 items. The Fourth Round of negotiations was 
launched at the Second session of the Ministerial Council of APTA on 26 
October 2007 and was concluded during the 44th Standing Committee meeting 
held on 24-25 July 2014 in Bangkok, Thailand. 
One interesting i ssue must be mentioned here . India started experiencing huge 
trade deficits with the APTA since the joining of China in APTA in 2001. India 
has trade surpluses with Bangladesh, Lao PDR and Sri Lanka and deficits with 
South Korea and China. In 2014, India’s trade deficit with APTA was  US$ 41.82 
billion while that with China was US$ 44.76 billion! 
15.3.2  ASEAN-India Free Trade Area 
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand in 1967 formed the 
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN). Five more members, Brunei, 
Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar and Vietnam, joined the ASEAN by 1999. India 
signed a historic free trade agreement (FTA) with the ASEAN in August 2009 
and the India -ASEAN FTA came into force on 1 January 2010. However, India 
has a PSA with Thailand since 2004 and  FTA&EIAs with Singapore and 
Malaysia since 2005 and 2011 respectively.  
Before the free trade area in goods and services with the ASEAN, India’s only 
south-east Asian connection was with Singapore (2005). Along with the FTA 
with the ASEAN, India has signe d FTA&EIAs with Japan (1 stAugust, 2011) and 
South Korea (on 1 January, 2010), extending its economic cooperation till East 
Asia.  
Since the formation of the India -ASEAN FTA, trade between India and ASEAN 
countries has increased particularly in thirteen sectors –  
i) mineral fuels, oils, and distillation products 
ii) organic chemicals 
iii) miscellaneous chemical products 
iv) plastics and articles thereof 
v) rubber and articles thereof 
vi) pearls, precious stones, metals, and coins 
vii) iron and steel 
viii) articles of iron and steel 
ix) copper and articles thereof 
x) nuclear reactors, boilers, and machinery 
xi) electrical, electronic equipment 
xii) vehicles other than railway, tramway (transport equipment) and  
xiii) Optical, photo, technical, medical apparatus and the like  


--- Page 41 ---
 
 
 
93 
India and 
Multilateral Trading 
System 
15.3.3  South Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA) 
The South Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA) was formed between the seven 
SAARC (South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation) countries - 
Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka on 1 
January 2006. It was signed durin g the 12 th SAARC summit in Islamabad, 
Pakistan. Afghanistan joined the bloc in 2011 becoming the eleventh member of 
SAFTA.As described in Table 1 5.1, India has separate bilateral FTAs with 
Bhutan and Sri Lanka and PSAs with Afghanistan and Nepal. Further, India and 
Bangladesh are having preferential trade agreement since 1975 through the 
Bangkok Agreement. 
The origin of SAFTA can be traced back to the formation of the SAARC 
Preferential Trading Arrangement (SAPTA) which was signed on 11 April, 1993 
in Dhaka, Bangladesh. SAPTA came into force on 7 December, 1995. Initially 
the negotiations were based on a product -by-product approach. There were four 
rounds of negotiations. The first round of negotiations was held in 1995 and only 
226 products were covered. Th is round of negotiations didn’t cover non -tariff 
barriers. The second round followed in 1997 with 1800 items and non -tariff 
barriers were discussed. The third round of negotiations covered 2700 items and 
some non -tariff barriers were relaxed. The fourth ro und was suspended due to 
heightened tensions between India and Pakistan. Talks resumed in 2003 and 
SAFTA was created in 2006. 
SAFTA was formed to replace SAPTA and enhance economic cooperation 
within the region with a final aim to form a South Asia Economic Union. Though 
the initial agreement of SAFTA promised zero customs duty on all traded goods 
within the members, political conflict between India and Pakistan has remained a 
hurdle in achieving the economic goals.  
The aim of SAFTA was straight forward – reduce tariffs and increase trade 
within the region. The instruments of economic cooperation among SAFTA 
members included Trade Liberalisation Programme, Rules of Origin, Institutional 
Arrangements, Consultations and Dispute Settlement Procedures and Safeg uard 
Measures. SAFTA did not include trade in services. This was later covered by the 
SAARC Agreement on Trade in Services (SATIS) signed in 2010 at the 16th 
SAARC Summit in April 2010 in Thimphu, Bhutan.  SATIS came into force in 
29 November 2012. 
Since the inception of SAPTA, India is having a trade surplus with the member 
nations as a whole. Even with individual member nations, the story remains the 
same, with very few exceptions. After forming the SAFTA, India’s trade surplus 
has increased signif icantly. India’s trade surplus with SAFTA members stood at 
US$ 0.78 billion in 1993 which increased to US$ 3.93 billion n 2005 and US$ 
17.05 billion in 2014 


--- Page 42 ---
 
 
 
94 
Globalisation 15.3.4  India-MERCOSUR PSA 
This is a classic example of economic co -operations beyond the geographical 
neighbourhood. MERCOSUR was formed between Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay 
and Uruguay in 1994. Venezuela was suspended from the bloc in 2016. India and 
MERCOSUR signed a Framework Agr eement on 17 June 2003 at Asuncion, 
Paraguay. The aim of this Framework Agreement was to create conditions and 
mechanisms for negotiations in the first stage followed by reciprocal tariff 
preferences and in the second stage and finally to negotiate a FTA c onforming to 
the WTO guidelines. Following this Framework Agreement, a Preferential Trade 
Agreement (PTA) was signed on 25January, 2004 at New Delhi, India. The 
major goal of this PTA was to strengthen the economic ties further and increase 
trade between t he member nations through reciprocal tariff reductions. The 
existing PSA was finally signed on 1 June, 2009. 
Under the existing agreement, India has preferential access in the MERCOSUR 
for organic chemicals, pharmaceuticals, essential oils, plastics & arti cles, rubber 
and rubber products, tools and implements, machinery items, electrical 
machinery and equipment. India has brought down duties in meat products, 
chemicals, raw hides and skins, leather articles, wool, cotton yarn, glass and 
glassware, iron and steel, machinery and equipment, optical, photographic and 
cinematographic apparatus. 
Apart from these nations, India has had a PSA with Chile in the Latin American 
continent since 2007. 
India’s trade balance with the four MERCOSUR nations (Argentina, Brazi l, 
Paraguay and Uruguay) is determined predominantly by that with Brazil. India 
registered trade surpluses with Paraguay and Uruguay and deficit with Argentina 
since 1994. The story with Brazil doesn’t exhibit any secular trend. India 
experienced a booming trade surplus with Brazil during 2005-2008 followed by a 
sudden and big deficit in 2009 followed by increasing surpluses since 2010. 
15.3.5  Global System of Trade Preferences among Developing 
Countries  
The Agreement on the Global System of Trade Prefere nces among Developing 
Countries (GSTP) was established on 13 April, 1988 at Belgrade, the present day 
capital of Serbia and the capital of Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in 
1988. It was negotiated by 48 developing countries that were member of th e 
Group of 77.  
GSTP was formed as a preferential trade agreement (PTA)to increase trade 
between developing countries in the framework of the United Nations 
Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). Its entry came into force on 
19 April 1989 and its notification to the WTO on 25 September 1989. 


--- Page 43 ---
 
 
 
95 
India and 
Multilateral Trading 
System 
Bangladesh, Cuba, Ghana, India, Nigeria, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Tanzania, 
Zimbabwe were the founding members of GSTP, which are still remain as 
members. GSTP was later expanded with the ratifications by Peru (on 1 5 April 
1989); Mozambique, Myanmar, Nicaragua (on 3 May 1989); Macedonia, Guinea, 
Guyana (on 4 May, 1989);Mexico (on 13 May 1989); Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, North 
Korea, South Korea (on 11 June 1989); Pakistan (on 8 July 1989); Morocco (on 
13 July 1989); Alge ria, Argentina, Benin, Bolivia, Brazil, Cameroon, Chile, 
Colombia, Ecuador, Egypt (on 16 July 1989); Libya, Malaysia (on 31 August 
1989); the Philippines, Sudan, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia (on 25 
August 1989); Venezuela, Vietnam and the trade b loc of MERCOSUR (on 2 
November 2006). 
The Sao Paulo Round of GSTP, was launched in 2004, with 24 countries 
participating. At the end of the negotiations, Ministerial Modalities were adopted 
on 2 December, 2009 wherein it was agreed on a tariff reduction of  at least 20% 
on at least 70% of all dutiable tariff -lines. India unilaterally offered a tariff 
reduction of 25% on 77% of its tariff lines for Least Developed Countries 
(LDCs). A Ministerial Meeting of the GSTP Negotiating Committee was held in 
2010 in Br azil for signing of the "Final Act Embodying the Results of the Sao 
Paulo Round" and the "Sao Paulo Round Protocol on the Agreement on GSTP". 
As of 2014, only 8 countries, including India, signed the protocol. 
15.4  INDIA’S OTHER STRATEGIC GROUPS 
Along with various multilateral agreements, India is also part of various strategic 
groups that work towards knowledge sharing, capacity building, strengthening 
diplomatic engagements among member nations. These groups are of great 
advantage to India as they help i n gathering economic cooperation, gaining a 
stronger voice in advocating for its interests. Such groups have also helped India 
in building and strengthening bilateral and multilateral relationships and fostering 
economic and political ties.  By actively pa rticipating in these groups, India can 
advance its economic interests, strengthen its global influence, and contribute to 
shaping the international economic order. Some of these strategic groups are 
discussed in this section. 
15.4.1 The Group of Twenty (G20) 
The Group of Twenty (G20) was founded in 1999 after the Asian financial crisis 
as a forum for the Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors to discuss 
global economic and financial issues. G20 comprises 19 countries (Argentina, 
Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, 
Republic of Korea, Mexico, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Turkey, United 
Kingdom and United States) and the European Union. The G20 members 
represent around 85% of the global GDP, over 75% of the global trade, and about 
two-thirds of the world population. In the wake of 2007 financial crisis, G20 was 


--- Page 44 ---
 
 
 
96 
Globalisation upgraded to the level of Heads of State/Government and was designated the 
“premier forum for international economic cooperation”. 
The G20 Summit is held annually, under the leadership of a rotating Presidency. 
The G20 initially focused largely on broad macroeconomic issues, but it has 
since expanded its agenda to inter -alia include trade, sustainable development, 
health, agriculture, energy, envir onment, climate change, and anti -corruption. 
The G20 Presidency steers the G20 agenda for one year and hosts the Summit. 
The Group does not have a permanent secretariat. The Presidency is supported by 
the Troika – previous, current and incoming Presidency.  During India’s 
Presidency, the troika will comprise Indonesia, India and Brazil, respectively. 
India holds the Presidency of the G20 from December 1, 2022 to November 30, 
2023. The theme of India’s G20 Presidency is “Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam” or 
“One Earth, One Family, One Future” India’s G20 priorities are: 
• Green Development, Climate Finance & LiFE (Lifestyle for Environment) 
• Accelerated, Inclusive & Resilient Growth  
• Accelerating progress on SDGs 
• Technological Transformation & Digital Public Infrastructure 
• Multilateral Institutions for the 21st century 
• Women-led development 
15.4.2  BRICS 
The leaders of BRIC (Brazil, Russia, India, and China) countries met for the first 
time in St. Petersburg, Russia, on the margins of G8 Outreach Summit in July 
2006. Shortly afterwards, in September 2006, the group was formalised as BRIC 
during the 1st BRI C Foreign Ministers’ Meeting, which met on the sidelines of 
the General Debate of the UN Assembly in New York City. After a series of high 
level meetings, the 1st BRIC summit was held in Yekaterinburg, Russia on 16 
June 2009. BRIC group was renamed as BRIC S (Brazil, Russia, India, China, 
South Africa) after South Africa was accepted as a full member at the BRIC 
Foreign Ministers’ meeting in New York in September 2010. Over a period of 
time, BRICS countries have come together to deliberate on important issue s 
under the three pillars of political and security, economic and financial and 
cultural and people to people exchanges. In 2023, South Africa will host the 
BRICS summit.  India has hosted the BRICS summits three times; first in 2012, 
then in 2016 and 2021.  
15.4.3  The Quadrilateral Security Dialogue (QSD) 
The Quadrilateral Security Dialogue (QSD), commonly known as the Quad, is an 
informal strategic security dialogue between Australia, India, Japan and the 
United States. Since its establishment in 2007, the representatives for the four -


--- Page 45 ---
 
 
 
97 
India and 
Multilateral Trading 
System 
member nations have met periodically. The motive behind the Quad is to keep 
the strategic sea routes in the Indo -Pacific free of any military or political 
influence. The core objective of the Quad is to secure a rules-based global order, 
freedom of navigation and a liberal trading system.  
Quad partners are working together on the Indo -Pacific’s most pressing 
challenges and priorities, including cooperation on climate, critical and emerging 
technology, cyber security, infrastructure, regional health security, space, 
maritime security, counterterrorism, humanitarian assistance and disaster relief. 
The Quad complements other bilateral, regional and multilateral cooperation in 
the Indo-Pacific, including with ASEAN and Pacific partners.  
Check Your Progress 1 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Enlist the multilateral agreements which India has signed since 1975. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) When was SAFTA created and why? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) What is GSTP? Highlight the achievements of Sao Paulo round.  
 …………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
15.5 A BRIEF HISTORY OF EVOLUTION OF 
REGIONAL TRADING AGREEMENTS 
India joined the GATT on 8 July 1948, soon after the GATT was formed on 
October 30, 1947. As elaborated in Unit 13, the Quad (the United States, the EU, 
Canada and Japan) dominated the world economy and they bargained over tariff 
cuts among themselves and allowed the developing-nations to enjoy the benefits 
of freer trade. Like other under -developed and developing nations, India was not 
very active. India enjoyed the benefits of tariff liberalization and other special 
and differential treatment accorded to developing nations and did not engage in 
the discussions to a large extent. This continued till the Uruguay Round and India 
joined the WTO from the day of its existence (1 January, 1995). 


--- Page 46 ---
 
 
 
98 
Globalisation Two major outcomes of the Uruguay Round, apart from the formation of the 
WTO on 1 January, 1995, were the establishment of the General Agreement on 
Trade in Services (GATS) and the Agreement on Trade -Related Intellectual 
Property Rights (TRIPS). The GATS w as introduced for a freer and fairer trade 
in services among the WTO signatories. The TRIPS Agreement covers copyright 
and related rights, trademarks including service marks, geographical indications 
including appellations of origin, industrial designs and patents.  
The idea was that the developing nations would gain from tariff reductions and 
trade facilitations and from reduction of agricultural subsidies by the developed 
nations. The sources of gains for the developed nations would be through 
liberalization of trade in services and TRIPS. So, it would be a win -win situation 
for both the developed and the developing members of the WTO. 
With time, the developing countries like Brazil, China and India became 
important players in the world economy. Exports of  goods and services increased 
from the developing countries. This resulted in a change of balance of decision -
making power in the WTO away from the Quad.  
The WTO negotiations were based on the requirement of binding tariff cuts and 
other policy commitment s from all but the poorest members. This led the 
developing member nations to voice their disagreement in unison during the 
Doha Rounds. They united to object to the provisions that threatened their 
domestic interests. Thus, the only North -North negotiatio ns under the GATT 
were replaced by North -South negotiations under the WTO. The underlying 
interests were vastly different, making the negotiations way more complicated. 
During the Ministerial Conference of Geneva in May 1998, the developing 
countries, led by India, opposed to the idea of a new round of negotiations before 
a thorough review of the outcome of the Uruguay Round. In particular, the 
developing countries voiced their concern against the developed countries’ 
reluctance in implementing the Uruguay Round commitments on agricultural 
subsidies. 
Thus, from a mere bystander during the GATT regime, India transformed into a 
prominent member instrumental in voicing the concerns of the developing 
economies during the WTO negotiations. 
15.6 INDIA’S CONTRIBUTION IN THE WTO 
In this section, we will discuss the major issues in which India has played an 
active role in the WTO negotiations. 
15.6.1  Agriculture 
Agriculture has been the most debated issue in the WTO negotiations. Substantial 
reforms in agriculture markets have been one of the most important agenda since 
the inception of the Doha Round. The major issues of disagreement, including 
