--- Page 11 ---
 
 
 
63 
Multilateral Trading 
System: 
Development and 
Challenges 
13.4.2  Ministerial Conference of Geneva 
The Ministerial Conference of Geneva in May 1998 followed the Singapore 
Ministerial Conference. It was mainly aimed at celebrating the 50 th anniversary 
of multilateral trading system. The developing countries, led by India, opposed to 
the idea of a new round o f negotiations before a thorough review of the outcome 
of the Uruguay Round. The developing nations argued that they could still not 
meet the obligations undertaken in the Uruguay Round. The Cairns group (a 
group of 20 agricultural exporting countries comp osed of Argentina, Australia, 
Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Indonesia, 
Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, South Africa, 
Thailand, Uruguay, and Vietnam) insisted on the elimination of agricul tural 
subsidies as a precondition for a new round.  
A “semaphore system” or the “boxes” of agricultural support was devised by the 
Uruguay Round negotiators (see Table 13.1). These boxes referred to the 
“colour-coding of support programmes according to their degree of distortion and 
hence their status under the Agreement on Agriculture’s scheme of commitments 
and restrictions”. The Red box, though a purely theoretical construct, depicted 
the subsidies that members are prohibited from offering. The Blue and Green 
boxes contained the exempt forms of support. In between, the Amber box 
referred to the zone of maximum commitment.  
Table 13.1: The Semaphore System of Agricultural Production Subsidies 
 Definition Examples Uruguay Round Commitments 
Red box 
Prohibited policies that are 
illegal. 
No forms of domestic 
support are currently in the 
red box. 
Not allowed. 
Amber box 
Non-exempt, trade -distorting 
policies that are subject to 
review and reduction over 
time. 
 
Market price support, direct 
payments and import 
subsidies. 
 
De minimis supports were 
allowed up to certain limits; caps 
were set on the support of 
members that historically had 
above de minimis levels, which 
were then subject to reduction by 
20 per cent for developed 
members over fiv e years and by 
13.3 per cent for developing 
members over ten years. 
 
Blue box 
Exempt forms of support, 
including payments made in 
conjunction with production -
limiting programmes. 
Production is required to 
receive the payments, but the 
actual payments do n ot 
relate directly to the current 
quantity of that production. 
No limits. 
Green box 
Exempt policies that are not 
subject to limitations. 
“Decoupled” payments not 
linked to production 
decisions, research or 
training, pest and disease 
control, inspection services, 
marketing and promotion 
services, certain food aid etc. 
No limits. 
 
Source: The History and Future of the World Trade Organization, WTO (2013).  
 


--- Page 12 ---
 
 
 
64 
Globalisation The European Commission (EC) refused to that and, along with Japan, stressed 
upon issues related to trade and investment and trade and competition. Several 
weeks of negotiations could not break the deadlock. As a result, the Seattle 
Ministerial Meeting in 1999 could not agree on an agenda. This marked an 
unprecedented challenge to the multilateral trading system. 
13.4.3  The Doha Round 
The Doha Round, also known as the Doha Development round, was launched at 
the 4th ministerial conference in Doha, Qatar in November 2001. It was 
predominantly aimed at making globalization pro-poor in nature through removal 
of agricultural subsidies. It covered a whole array of issues like market access in 
agriculture and manufactured goods, trade in services, TRIPS, trade and 
investment, trade and competition, transparency and government procurement, 
trade facilitation, WTO rules, dispute settlement, trade and environment, 
electronic commerce, small economies, trade, debt and finance, transfer of 
technology, special and differential treatment, and implementation -related issues 
and concerns. However, some of  these issues were dropped from the 
negotiations. Till date, these rounds of negotiations are not closed, and 
disagreements still linger. It was even proposed to “officially kill” the round as 
the Doha negotiations have stalled. Though some less contentiou s issues such as 
trade facilitation and removal of trade barriers against exports from the LDCs 
(least developed countries) were negotiated successfully at the Bali Round of 
2013, individual members have shifted their stance (the round has lasted well 
over a decade) under the ever-changing global economic environment. 
13.4.4  The Bali Round 
The last ministerial meeting was held at Bali, Indonesia in December 2013. As 
discussed earlier, the member countries had agreed to a limited agreement 
consisting of a multilateral agreement on trade facilitation, an agreement for the 
reduction of lowering barriers to exports from LDCs and a four-year peace clause 
(Article 13 of the World Trade Organization's Agreement on Agriculture). This 
peace-clause, insisted by India, was meant to shield public stockholding 
programs for food security in developing countries with the promise to find a 
permanent solution to the problem before the expiry of this peace clause. This 
agreement was to be ratified in July 201 4. However, India had a change of 
government in May 2014 and the new government had the view that “the peace -
clause was not good enough and the permanent solution to the public stockpiling 
for food security must be reached simultaneously with the signing o f the 
remainder of the agreement” (Bhagwati et al, 2014).  
13.4.5 The Nairobi Round 
This ministerial conference was held at Nairobi, Kenya in December 2015. To 
protect the developing nations from the market volatility, the members decided 


--- Page 13 ---
 
 
 
65 
Multilateral Trading 
System: 
Development and 
Challenges 
on ‘Special Safeg uard Mechanism’ (SSM) for developing countries. As per this 
mechanism the developing countries were allowed to increase tariffs on 
agricultural products temporarily in case of high imports or fall in price. The 
objective behind this SSM was to mitigate the  distortions in agriculture trade and 
the price volatility risks. We can say that SSM acted as a trade remedy tool. This 
ministerial conference also looked at the agricultural export subsidies. The 
members took a historic decision of eliminating the agricu ltural export subsidies. 
It was a significant reformatory step for agriculture trade. This levels the playing 
field for exporters of agricultural products as it eliminated any possibility of trade 
distortion due to absence of subsidies. In particular, the poor farmers were to 
stand at benefit. 
13.4.6 The Geneva Round 
This was the second time when the ministerial conference took place in Geneva 
(first time it was held in 1998) in June 2022. After the negotiations among 
delegations, the ‘Geneva Package’ was adopted. It is a package of agreements 
which include ministerial declaration on emergency response to food insecurity, 
ministerial decisions on World Food Programme (WFP), response to COVID -19 
and preparedness for future pandemics, agreement on trade -related aspects of 
intellectual property rights,  E-commerce Moratori um and Work Programme, 
Agreement on Fisheries Subsidies. 
To protect global fish stocks, a multilateral agreement has been passed to control 
harmful subsidies for the next four years on illegal, unreported and unregulated 
fishing. However, the artisanal fishing and traditional farmers would not face any 
restrictions under this agreement. A binding decision to excuse the food 
purchases by UN under the WFP  for humanitarian purposes, from any export 
restrictions was also taken. The importance of food trade in c ontext of global 
food security was emphasised and the WTO members issued a declaration that 
they would avoid bans on food exports keeping the domestic food security under 
consideration. WTO had first imposed custom duties on electronic transmissions 
in 199 8. E -commerce transactions, which include digitally traded goods and 
services are now very common unlike during 1998. The developing countries 
lose a huge potential tariff revenue from the imports of digital products. Given 
the financial consequences of th e moratorium, India has asked the WTO to 
review the extension of the moratorium. To ease the process of manufacturing 
and access of COVID -19 vaccines, the WTO members have temporarily waived 
the intellectual property patents on Covid -19 vaccines without th e consent of 
patent holder for 5 years. 


--- Page 14 ---
 
 
 
66 
Globalisation 13.5 REASONS FOR FAILURE OF WTO 
NEGOTIATIONS 
Baldwin (2016) points out a set of external and internal reasons for this failure of 
the multilateral trading system. We discuss such reasons in this section. 
13.5.1  Internal Reasons 
The internal reasons predominantly refer to the changes in the functioning of the 
multilateral trade negotiations that took place in the WTO vis -à-vis the GATT. 
During the GATT negotiations, multilateral negotiations involved the Q uad (the 
United States, the European Union, Japan and Canada). They bargained over 
tariff cuts among themselves and allowed the developing -nations to enjoy the 
benefits of such freer trade. In contrast to that, the WTO negotiations were based 
on the requir ement of binding tariff cuts and other policy commitments from all 
but the poorest members. This led the developing member nations to voice their 
disagreement in unison during the Doha Rounds. They united to object to the 
provisions that threatened their d omestic interests. Thus, the only North -North 
negotiations under the GATT were replaced by North -South negotiations under 
the WTO. The underlying interests were vastly different, making the negotiations 
way more complicated. 
13.5.2  External Reasons 
1) Lost dominance of the advanced economies : This happened predominantly 
due to two reasons. First, as discussed earlier, the Quad (the United States, 
the European Union, Japan and Canada) dominated the world economy. The 
Quad accounted for two -thirds of world impo rts. However, with the 
emergence of the developing the nations, this share reduced drastically to 
only half of world imports. Second, the number of member countries engaged 
in the multilateral framework had grown significantly. This shifted the power 
within the multilateral structure. Since 1986 over 70 developing nations had 
joined and half of them joined after the formation of the WTO. China, one the 
most prominent economic powers in the world, joined the WTO only in 2001. 
Now, as discussed earlier, such shifting in power and the very structure of the 
WTO had made negotiations much more complex in nature. 
2) Regionalism: Regionalism began much before the World Wars, with 
Belgium clubbing up with Luxembourg in 1921. Post -World War II, 
formation of the BENELUX (Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg) 
announced a new era of regional economic cooperation. However, as 
discussed in detail later in Unit 14, regional trading blocs proliferated 
particularly after 1993. Now, the question is what has regionalism too wit h 
the WTO negotiations? The answer is simple. Regional economic co -
operations among countries shifted more weight towards small bloc 
formation rather than multilateral co -operation. In most cases, regional 


--- Page 15 ---
 
 
 
67 
Multilateral Trading 
System: 
Development and 
Challenges 
trading agreements (RTAs) involve deeper degrees o f cooperation among the 
member states than mere tariff reduction. In fact, Baldwin (2016) argues that 
“the rise of regionalism probably made it harder to conclude the Uruguay 
Round”.  
3) Unilateral tariff reductions by developing countries: As Ethier (2011) points 
out, the new wave of regionalism, the form of regional economic cooperation 
that started from the mid -1980s, is very different from that before. Ethier 
(2011) calls it “Contemporary Regionalism”. This form of regionalism 
involves one or more  small countries competing in terms of reforms to link 
up with a large country. The key is inflow of foreign capital to these small 
developing capital scarce nations. The smaller countries would go for 
unilateral tariff liberalization (exactly what India d id in 1991) and other 
economic reforms in the domestic fronts to attract foreign capital. Moreover, 
staying outside any RTA increases the cost for the country as more members 
join that RTA. Thus, the traditional view of protecting domestic industries 
and following an import substitution development agenda, had been replaced 
by a more liberalized structure that allows for offshoring and reciprocal 
RTAs. Baldwin (2016) argues that “Because two -way tariff cutting had been 
the main fuel for the political econom y juggernaut of trade liberalization, this 
unilateralism made multilateral talks less attractive to many developed 
members whose exporters saw their sales to developed nations boom even as 
Doha Round staggered from failure to failure”.  
Check Your Progress 2 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Provide a summary of the first ministerial conference of WTO. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) What is ‘semaphore system’? Briefly discuss. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Enlist the three external reasons behind the failure of WTO negotiations. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 


--- Page 16 ---
 
 
 
68 
Globalisation 13.6 THE WAY FORWARD 
The WTO was founded to establish a world trading system free from any 
distortion. This was to be achieved through multilateral negotiations, ultimately 
achieving global free trade. However, as we have already seen, since the 
inception of the WTO, the negot iations were marred with conflicting interests. 
Such conflicts led to the deadlocks in all the rounds of negotiations culminating 
in the practical failure of the Doha rounds. Apart from these conflicts the other 
reason that has often been projected as the culprit is the unprecedented 
proliferation of regional trading agreements. Thus, whether regionalism plays the 
role of “stepping stones” or “stumbling blocks” towards achieving global free 
trade becomes crucial. In this section , we will focus on this debat e and discuss 
the way forward for multilateralism.  
13.6.1  Arguments for Stumbling Blocs 
1) RTAs are inherently discriminatory in nature. RTAs lead to benefit the 
members at the expense of non -members. This is in direct conflict to the 
notion of multilateralism. In particular, trade diversion (discussed in detail in 
Unit 14) arising out of an RTA  relocates production to an inefficient member 
from an efficient non -member leading to loss in efficiency. The WTO 
principles of MFN (most favoured nation) and reciprocity tried to solve this 
problem. However, violation of MFN leads to weakening of reciprocity.  
2) With the advent of “contemporary regionalism”, RTAs involve trade and 
investments. Thus, RTAs have evolved beyond tariff and non -tariff barriers 
but have transcended into the domain of FDIs. This is particularly significant 
for small developing countries that went for unilateral liberalization and other 
reforms to attract FDIs from developed nations. This form of regionalism 
absorbs resources away from multilateral negotiations creating havoc for 
multilateral liberalization. 
3) One more offshoot of this contemporary regionalism is that large countries 
prefer to get into bilateral agreements with only those small countries that 
offer higher profits for them. Rampant advertisement by Gabon of giving 
unmatched tax benefits to invest ors is a glaring example. Thus, regionalism 
trumps multilateralism.  
4) Smaller countries having no or negligible market power in the global 
economy prefer to club together as a single economic entity by forming 
RTAs among them. Global free trade would erase this market power.   
5) RTAs erode the political support for multilateralism. This becomes even 
more important when develop countries try to impose non -trade issues like 
intellectual property rights and labour standards during negotiations. For 
example, emerging economies of India, China and Brazil are strictly opposed 
to further proliferation of non-trade issues in the WTO.  


--- Page 17 ---
 
 
 
69 
Multilateral Trading 
System: 
Development and 
Challenges 
6) RTAs are likely to increase the adjustment costs associated with multilateral 
liberalization, thus making multilateralism less desirable.  
7) Different countries have different regulatory structures and standards. This 
also makes multilateral negotiations complicated. 
13.6.2  Arguments for Stepping Stones 
Before proceeding to analyse the arguments in favour of RTAs are “stepping 
stones” to mu ltilateralism and finally to Global Free Trade (GFT), we need to 
examine the theoretical process though which an existing RTA can enlarge itself 
to a Multilateral structure or GFT. The movement from a multilateral trade 
negotiation (MTN) to GFT depends on whether the countries involved practice 
open regionalism or unanimous regionalism. Open regionalism implies that a 
country can join the RTA without any restrictions. On the other hand, unanimous 
regionalism means that all the already existing members must agree unanimously 
for a new country to join an existing RTA. Baldwin (2006) provides a lucid 
exposition of this process.  
To start with , let’s assume a country setting unilateral (welfare maximizing 
optimal) tariffs on its import from the rest of the world  and an MTN has been 
announced. That is, reciprocal trade liberalization among potential member 
countries is going to be negotiated. It results in an increase in the marginal cost of 
supplying protection as exporters now lobby the government to reduce tari ffs. 
This changes the whole array of political forces within the country. The exporters 
lobby would now pitch in to support trade liberalization as that would reduce the 
price they face in foreign markets making them more competitive. The importers 
lobby would oppose as they would be facing stronger competition from foreign 
counterparts. As Baldwin (2006) argues, “the result is that now all nations 
participating on the basis of reciprocity find it politically optimal to cut tariffs 
somewhat”. This is known as the Juggernaut effect. The ultimate decision of 
joining or not joining depends on the size of the exporters and import -competing 
industries. If the size of the export group is larger, then the political equilibrium 
in the economy shifts towards to pro -membership. This process becomes even 
more relevant when one country joins the MTN. One member’s decision to join 
an MTN leads others to follow as staying outside would become more costly, and 
the political forces in the non -member countries would further l obby so that the 
government decides to join the group. This is known as the Domino effect. 
According to the domino theory, the formation of a RTA raises the value of 
entering a RTA for non -members, and therefore leads to a spate of RTAs in the 
future (Bald win, 1995). The Domino effect can then start the process of 
Juggernaut effect. This will weaken the anti -membership forces and increase the 
strength of the pro-membership forces. This process will imply that when another 
round of reciprocal multilateral ne gotiations is launched, pro -liberalization 
political pressure will be stronger and anti -liberalization pressure weaker. Hence, 
RTAs are building blocks for multilateral liberalization. 


--- Page 18 ---
 
 
 
70 
Globalisation Having discussed the Juggernaut and Domino effects, we can analyze the 
arguments in favour of “regionalism acting as a stepping stone to 
multilateralism”.  
1) Proliferation of RTAs would lead to further multilateral liberalization. As one 
RTA is formed, it becomes costlier for the non -members to stay outside the 
bloc.   
2) RTAs act as “laboratories” of international cooperation – economic 
cooperation can be tested in a small group of countries before extending it to 
the rest of the world. One country may lack the political support necessary for 
GFT. However, as it enters an RTA, it may find it easier to pursue GFT 
though multilateralism.  
3) In a world looking like a “spaghetti bowl” of bilateral and multilateral 
agreements, harmonizing the rules becomes imminent. With modular 
production structures becoming the order of the day,  unified and 
synchronized rules of origin can only be achieved through multilateral 
negotiations. 
13.7  LET US SUM UP 
In this unit we discussed the characteristics, evolution and prospects of 
multilateral trading system. We start with a brief discussion of  the General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and its four phases in order of the 
chronology of its rounds of negotiations. Next, we moved to the discussions on 
the Uruguay round stressing on the issues, negotiations, achievements and the 
birth of the  World Trade Organization (WTO). We then analysed the different 
rounds of the WTO negotiations as they evolved over time. We focused on the 
issues, conflicts of members over these issues and the changing nature of the 
negotiations over time. While discussi ng the WTO rounds we found that 
deadlocks marred these negotiations; hence, we tried to understand the reasons 
for the failure of the WTO rounds, particularly the Doha round. In the next 
section we introduce the debate of whether regionalism acts as a “ste pping stone” 
or “stumbling blocs” to multilateralism. We briefly discussed the arguments in 
favour of both the sides of this argument and in the process understood the future 
prospects of multilateralism. 
13.8  KEY WORDS 
Domino effect  The phenomenon when a non -member country 
finds it politically optimal to join an existing 
MTN. 
GATT General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. An 
agreement signed by 23 countries to initiate 
multilateral trade liberalization. 


--- Page 19 ---
 
 
 
71 
Multilateral Trading 
System: 
Development and 
Challenges 
Juggernaut effect The phenomenon of m ember countries of an 
MTN finding it politically optimal to reduce 
tariffs based on the principle of reciprocity. 
Multilateralism Reciprocal agreements between multiple 
countries aiming at a common goal freer and 
fairer trade. 
Regionalism Reciprocal agreem ents between two or more 
countries which may or may not belong to the 
same geographical neighbourhood. 
WTO World Trade Organization. WTO is a 
supranational organization of 164 member 
nations that regulates international trade. 
13.9 SOME USEFUL REFERENCES 
Baldwin, Richard (2006). Multilateralising Regionalism: Spaghetti Bowls as 
Building Blocs on the Path to Global Free Trade. The World Economy , Vol. 29, 
Issue 11, 1451 – 1518.  
Baldwin, Richard (2016). The World Trade Organization and the Future of 
Multilateralism. Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 30, No. 1, 95-116. 
The History and Future of the World Trade Organization (2013). WTO. Geneva. 
World Trade Report (2007). WTO. Geneva.  
13.10 ANSWERS/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES  
Check Your Progress 1 
1) See section 13.2 
2) See section 13.3.1 
3) See section 13.3.2 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) See section 13.4.1 
2) See section 13.4.2 
3) See section 13.5.2 
 
