--- Page 29 ---
 
 
 
81 
Regional Trading 
Agreements liberalized trade regime to another country in lieu of concrete steps to protect the 
environment by the government of that country. As we have discussed earlier, 
“Contemporary Regionalism” stresses on FDI and hence, deeper integration leads 
to higher degrees of investments. Along with FDI, technology transfers, also 
take place.  
14.6 EQUILIBRIUM STRUCTURE OF REGIONAL 
TRADING AGREEMENTS 
Regional trade agreements are reciprocal agreements between two or member 
countries or trading partners that determine the extent of economic integration. 
RTAs signed between members lead to deeper economic integration between 
them by lowering tariff and non-tariff barriers and facilitating trade among other 
gains as discussed earlier. An important characteristic of RTAs is that they are 
dynamic in nature. In other words, RTAs change in their structure over time. 
RTAs expand either horizontally (increase the number of members) or vertically 
(increasing the degree of economic cooperation among existing member 
countries) or both simultaneously.  
14.6.1  Horizontal Expansion 
Horizontal expansion (or expansion) of an RTA refers to an increase in the 
number of members in the RTA. To understand the nuances of this type of 
change in the structure of an RTA, we first need to understand the basic principle 
of regionalism followed by 
RTAs while considering expansion decision.  
There are two types of regionalism followed in the world regarding expansion 
decision of an existing RTA. When any country can join an existing RTA, 
without requiring the consent of the existing members of that RTA, we call it a 
case of Open Regionalism . That is, the RTA is open to membership to the 
group. The EU and the USA apparently follows Open Regionalism provided 
some conditions are satisfied by any potential member ex ante. For example, the 
EU is open to any European nation as long as that potential member satisfies the 
Copenhagen membership criteria (declared in 1993). The Copenhagen criteria 
require that any potential member country must have the institutions to preserve 
democratic governance and human rights, have a functioning market economy 
and accept the obligations and intent of the European Union. So far the USA is 
concerned; any country ready to accept the US template FTA will be provided 
accession as an FTA partner. The template now includes open agriculture 
markets, intellectual property rights and services. Thus, we can see that, in 
reality, no country or RTA follows this type of regionalism in practice. 
The other type of regionalism requires all the existing member countries of an 
RTA to agree to giving membership to a potential member country. Now, when a 
non
-member country wants membership of an existing RTA, broadly two things 
can happen – (1) it is granted accession to the RTA and the initial non-member 


--- Page 30 ---
 
 
 
82 
Globalisation country becomes a new member of the RTA or (2) it is not offered accession and 
the non-member remains a non-member. That is, the decision of the initial 
member countries of the existing RTA plays a crucial role in the expansion 
decision. This type of regionalism is known as Unanimous Regionalism. 
As a result, the horizontal expansion of an RTA depends completely on the type 
of regionalism – open or unanimous – that the RTA follows. Now, as an existing 
RTA gets bigger and bigger in size (in terms of members), it becomes more 
costly for the countries outside the RTA and as per Contemporary Regionalism, 
these non-member countries would abandon their anti-market, closed-economy 
policies and adopt reforms that will permit them to join the RTA.  
The most prominent example of Horizontal expansion is the ASEAN. When the 
group was formed in 1967, it consisted of Singapore, Malaysia, the Philippines, 
Thailand and Indonesia. However, it gave accession to five more members – 
Brunei in 1984, Vietnam in 1995, Laos and Myanmar in 1997 and Cambodia in 
1999. Further, Papua New Guinea and East Timor are presently observer nations 
and backed by a set of ASEAN members for membership in the ASEAN. 
14.6.2  Vertical Expansion 
Vertical expansion (or consolidation) of an RTA refers to deepening of economic 
cooperation among existing members of an RTA. Thus, cases like a PTA over 
time becoming an FTA or an FTA becoming a Customs Union over time are 
examples of vertical expansion of an RTA. 
The most prominent example of vertical expansion is that of NAFTA. NAFTA 
was established in 1994 and aimed at lowering of tariffs in several product areas. 
This agreement also aimed at phasing out slowly the cross-borders barriers to 
trade and investment across the three countries over time. The scope of the 
products covered under this agreement also increased overtime. 
14.6.3  Simultaneous Expansion 
This is the case when an existing RTA evolves over time, deepening economic 
cooperation among member countries and giving accession to new members 
simultaneously. Thus, one can think of an FTA becoming a Customs Union over 
time and increasing the number of member countries of the RTA. 
The classic example of simultaneous expansion is that of the European Union. 
The EU not only increased the number of members in the union but also 
increased the degree of economic cooperation among the union members. As 
briefly discussed earlier, the history of the European Union can be traced back to 
the formation of the BENELUX customs union between Belgium, the 
Netherlands and Luxembourg. This was followed by the formation of the 
European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) in 1951 which aimed at 
eliminating tariffs and quotas in iron ore, coke, coal and steel within the six 
member nations (Belgium, France, West Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, and the 


--- Page 31 ---
 
 
 
83 
Regional Trading 
Agreements Netherlands) and imposing a common external tariff on imports of these items 
from other countries. The countries then consolidated their cooperation further by 
signing two Treaties of Rome in 1957; one treaty established the European 
Economic Community (EEC) and the other formed the European Atomic Energy 
Commission (Euratom) for joint research, cooperation, and management in that 
field. The formation of the EEC was another leap forward with establishing a 
Common Market among the member nations. The two treaties went into effect on 
January 1, 1958, with the earlier Treaty of Paris becoming the constitution of the 
European Community. The ultimate objective was the formation “of an 
integrated market for the free movement of goods, services, capital, and people”. 
In 1973, the EEC was enlarged to include Denmark, Ireland, and the United 
Kingdom. Greece joined in 1981, followed by Portugal and Spain in 1986. Also, 
the Single European Act was signed in 1986. Eventually in 1993, the European 
Community was established with the signing of the Maastricht Treaty. This step 
was intended to expand economic, political and social integration among the 
members and finally an EMU was formed. In 1995, Austria, Finland, and 
Sweden joined the EU. On the midnight of 1 st January, 1999, the common 
currency Euro was launched which came into circulation in 2002. In 2004 
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, 
Slovakia and Slovenia joined the European Union followed by Bulgaria and 
Romania in 2007. In 2013, Croatia became the 28th EU member. Of these 28 
members, 19 countries have adopted the Euro as their currency.  
14.6.4  Address Game 
Now, one more question remains. What would an existing RTA do? Which type 
of expansion –
 horizontal, vertical or simultaneous – will it c hoose? As one can 
understand, the answer would depend on a number of factors like technology of 
production, market size, institutional parameters etc.  
The equilibrium structure of an RTA can be simply explained using the address 
game. Let’s assume that there are four countries in the world. Each nation can 
choose from four addresses exogenously given to them. Hence, there are four 
options possible. Each nation can choose one exclusive address such that each 
has its own address. Let’s depict this situation as {1, 1, 1, 1}. This is the case 
when no country is in an RTA, all of them are operating individually setting 
unilateral tariffs and non-tariff barrier
s on each other’s exports. The second 
option is that two nations choose one common address such that in each address 
there are two countries. Let’s depict this option as {2, 2}. This is the case when 
there are two RTAs in the world with two countries in each of the RTAs. A third 
option is three nations choosing one common address while the fourth choosing 
another. Let’s depict this option as {3, 1}. This is the case when three countries 
form one RTA while the fourth country is a non-member. The last option is when 
all countries choose the same address and we depict that as {4}. This is the case 
of global free trade. 


--- Page 32 ---
 
 
 
84 
Globalisation Now, let’s assign the following pay -offs to the countries under these four 
options–  
Option {1, 1, 1, 1} would yield a pay-off of 10 each such that we have {10, 10, 
10, 10}. 
Option {2, 2} would yield a pay-off of 13 each such that we have {13, 13} 
Option {3, 1} would yield a pay-off of 23 each to the member countries and 3 to 
the non-member such that we have {23, 3} 
Option {4} would yield a pay-off of 20 each such that we have {20} 
Now, the above game can be solved either through a simultaneous move game or 
a sequential move game. In the simultaneous move game, all the four nations 
take the decision simultaneously. In the sequential move game, one country 
moves first followed by the second, followed by the third and finally by the 
fourth country. 
Now, it can be easily checked that if the countries move simultaneously, then 
option {4} with pay-offs {20} each is the unique Nash equilibrium as pay-offs 10 
and 13 are strictly less than 20 while, the possibility of getting 3 makes {3, 1} a 
dominated strategy. Hence, if all the countries in the word simultaneously take a 
decision of forming an RTA, global free trade would be the Nash Equilibrium 
outcome. 
However, option {3, 1} with pay-offs {23, 3} turns out to be the Sub-game 
perfect Nash Equilibrium when countries move sequentially. This is intuitively 
very straight forward. It would be more profitable for any country to accept the 
offer made by the first mover country as pay-off {13} is larger than pay-off {10}. 
Thus, in the first stage, one RTA with two members is formed. In the next stage, 
this RTA would offer accession to the third country and it will again accept as a 
pay-off {23} is greater than {10} or {13}. However, after an RTA with three 
members is formed, that RTA will not offer membership to the fourth country as 
{20} is less a pay-off than {23}. Thus, if we consider unanimous regionalism and 
a sequential move game, {3, 1} would be the equilibrium structure and the RTA 
will have three members with the fourth country remaining as a non-member. 
Thus, the number of members in an RTA will depend on whether the game is 
played simultaneously or sequentially and whether the RTA follows open or 
unanimous 
regionalism.  
Check Your Progress 2 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Highlight the emergence of RTAs. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 


--- Page 33 ---
 
 
 
85 
Regional Trading 
Agreements …………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Explain the process of Trade Creation. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Briefly discuss the dynamic gains from RTAs.  
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
4) What is the difference between the horizontal expansion and vertical 
expansion? Briefly discuss. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
14.7  LET US SUM UP 
This unit discusses what Regional Trading Agreements are. We start with 
describing the basic characteristics of RTAs. In particular, we point out conflict 
between the aim of the WTO and the rationale of Regionalism. We then discuss 
the different types of RTAs depending on the different stages of economic 
cooperation among the member countries followed by a brief discussion on the 
evolution of RTAs in the world trading system. This unit then proceeds to define 
the gains to the member countries –
 static and dynamic – from the formation of 
RTAs. Finally, we spend some time to understand the dynamic nature of RTAs. 
Depending on the type of regionalism practiced – open versus unanimous – we 
find that RTAs may expand either in size (horizontal expansion) or further 
consolidate economic cooperation among existing members (vertical expansion). 
At the end, we provide a very simple game to illustrate that formation of 
multilateral RTAs, depending up on the timing of action by potential RTA 
members, may or may not culminate in global free trade. 


--- Page 34 ---
 
 
 
86 
Globalisation 14.8  KEY WORDS 
Common Market An RTA in which the member countries 
allow for free movement of factors of 
production among them. 
Contemporary Regionalism The pattern of regionalism that involves one 
or more small countries competing with 
each other in terms of reforms to link up 
with a large country. 
Customs Union An RTA in which the member countries, 
along with free trade among themselves, 
adopt a common external trade policy 
toward non-members. 
Economic and Monetary Union An RTA in which the member countries 
unify their monetary and fiscal policies. 
Economic Integration The process of reduction or abolition of 
tariff and non-tariff trade barriers coupled 
with unified economic policies, particularly, 
trade policies. 
Free Trade Area An RTA in which the member countries 
remove all tariffs and non-tariff barriers on 
imports from each other. 
Horizontal Expansion Expansion of an RTA through increase in 
the number of members in the RTA. 
Open Regionalism When any country can join an existing 
RTA, without requiring the consent of the 
existing members of that RTA. 
Preferential Trading Arrangement  An RTA in which the member countries 
lower their respective tariff rates and other 
non
-tariff barriers on their mutual trade. 
Trade Creation The gain from forming/joining an RTA 
arising due to shifting of production from 
inefficient domestic producer to an efficient 
producer in another member country. 
Trade Diversion 
 When an RTA is formed, production might 
shift from an efficient non-member to an 
efficient member country.  
Unanimous Regionalism When a country needs consent from all the 
members of an existing RTA to join the 
RTA. 


--- Page 35 ---
 
 
 
87 
Regional Trading 
Agreements Vertical Expansion Deepening of economic cooperation among 
existing members of an RTA. 
14.9 SUGGESTED REFERENCES 
Acharyya, Rajat (2014). International Economics: An Introduction to Theory and 
Policy. New Delhi: Oxford University Press. (Chapter – 14). 
Eithier, Wilfred J. (2011). Contemporary Regionalism. In Miroslav N. Jovanovic 
(Ed.) International Handbook on the Economics of Integration , Volume 1: 
General Issues and Regional Groups. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. (pp 121-135). 
Neal, Larry (2007). The Economics of Europe and the European Union . 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
14.10 ANSWERS/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES  
Check Your Progress 1 
1) See section 14.2 
2) See section 14.3 
3) See sub-section 14.3.2 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) See Section 14.4 
2) See sub-section 14.5.1 
3) See sub-section 14.5.2 
4) See sub-section 14.6.1 & 14.6.2 


--- Page 36 ---
 
 
 
88 
Globalisation 
UNIT 15  INDIA AND MUL TILATERAL TRADING 
SYSTEM  
Structure 
15.0 Objectives 
15.1 Introduction 
15.2 India’s Trade Agreements: An Overview 
15.3 India’s Multilateral Trade Agreements 
15.3.1  Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement 
15.3.2  ASEAN-India Free Trade Area 
15.3.3  South Asian Free Trade Area 
15.3.4  India-MERCOSUR PSA 
15.3.5  Global System of Trade Preferences among Developing Countries 
15.4 India’s other strategic groups 
            15.4.1  The Group of Twenty (G20) 
            15.4.2  BRICS 
            15.4.3 The Quadrilateral Security Dialogue (QSD) 
15.5  From GATT to WTO: India’s Transformation 
15.6 India’s Contribution in the WTO  
15.6.1 Agriculture 
 15.6.1.1 Subsidies 
 15.6.1.2 SSM 
15.6.2 Non-Agricultural Market Access (NAMA) 
15.6.3 Non-trade Related Issues 
15.6.4 Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) 
15.7 The Way Forward  
15.8 Let Us Sum Up 
15.9 Key Words 
15.10  Suggested References 
15.11 Answers/Hints to Check your Progress Exercises 
 
 Contributed by  Dr. Sunandam Ghosh, Centre for Development Studies, Kerala  
