--- Page 1 ---
 
 
 
53 
Multilateral Trading 
System: 
Development and 
Challenges 
 
 
 
 
BLOCK 6 
 
 
GLOBALISATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Unit 13 Multilateral Trading System: Development and 
Challenges 
Unit 14 Regional Trading Agreements 
Unit 15 India and Multilateral Trading System 


--- Page 2 ---
 
 
 
54 
Globalisation BLOCK INTRODUCTION 
This block is on Globalistaion.  
It has three units, i.e., Unit 13 - Multilateral Trading System: Development and 
Challenges, Unit 14 – Regional Trading Agreements  and Unit 15 – India and 
Multilateral Trading System.  
Unit 13 provides the understanding of the history and present status of multilateral trading 
system in terms of GATT, WTO rounds. WTO negotiations have failed in certain aspects in 
the past and hence the unit proceeds towards explaining the reasons of failed negotiations. At 
the end, a way forward is provided.  
Unit 14 throws light on the regional aspect of trading agreements. It explains the basic 
characteristics of such agreements and then discusses the types of regional trading 
agreements, preferential trading arrangements, free trade area a nd customs union to name a 
few. For better understanding of such agreements, a brief history of the evolution of regional 
agreements is also presented in the unit. The relevance of such regional agreements has been 
explained through gains (static and dynam ic) received from such agreements. To move 
further, the equilibrium structure of regional trading agreements has been discussed in terms 
of horizontal expansion, vertical expansion and simultaneous expansion.  
Unit 15 provides us with the understanding of how India is placed in these multilateral 
trading systems. Basically, this unit explains the agreements of which India is an integral part 
e.g., Asia-Pacific Trade agreement, ASEAN -India free trade area, SAFTA. Apart from these 
agreements, the unit highlights the contribution of India in WTO and how India has 
transformed itself with the change of GATT towards WTO regime. Agriculture sector in 
terms of subsidies and other policy initiatives in context of trade has been discussed at the 
end of the unit.  
 
 
 
 
 
  


--- Page 3 ---
 
 
 
55 
Multilateral Trading 
System: 
Development and 
Challenges 
UNIT 13  MUL TILATERAL TRADING SYSTEM: 
DEVELOPMENT AND CHALLENGES 
Structure 
13.0 Objectives 
13.1 Introduction 
13.2 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)  
13.3 The Uruguay Round 
13.3.1 The Negotiations and the birth of the WTO 
13.3.2 Achievements of the Uruguay Round 
13.4 The WTO Rounds 
13.4.1 Singapore Ministerial Conference 
13.4.2 Ministerial Conference of Geneva 
13.4.3 The Doha Round 
13.4.4 The Bali Round 
13.4.5 The Nairobi Round 
13.4.6 The Geneva Round  
13.5 Reasons for Failure of the WTO Negotiations 
13.5.1 Internal Reasons 
13.5.2 External Reasons 
13.6 The Way Forward  
13.6.1 Arguments for Stumbling Blocs 
13.6.2 Arguments for Stepping Stones 
13.7 Let us Sum Up 
13.8 Key Words 
13.9  Some useful References 
13.10 Answers/Hints to Check your Progress Exercises 
13.0  OBJECTIVES 
After studying this Unit, you should be able to:  
• explain multilateralism; 
• present the history and evolution of GATT; 
• discuss the issues and negotiations of the Uruguay round of negotiations; 
• list the achievements of the Uruguay round of negotiations; 
 
 Contributed by  Dr. Sunandam Ghosh, Centre for Development Studies, Kerala  


--- Page 4 ---
 
 
 
56 
Globalisation • discuss the various WTO rounds of negotiations; 
• elucidate the changing nature of WTO negotiations;  
• identify the reasons for the failure of the Doha round of WTO negotiations; 
• analyze the relationship between regionalism and multilateralism; and 
• discuss the future prospects of multilateralism. 
13.1   INTRODUCTION 
The establishment of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 
1947 heralded the advent of a multilateral tradin g system in the world economy. 
Before that, there were instances of economic cooperation among nations (for 
example, the bilateral agreement between Belgium and Luxembourg in 1921); 
however, such agreements were predominantly regional in nature. 
Multilateralism can be broadly defined as an understanding between multiple 
countries (three or more according to the definition proposed by Robert Keohane) 
to achieve a common goal. In this unit we would stick to the idea of multilateral 
trade liberalization and economic cooperation as the common goal. 
We start with a brief discussion of the GATT and its chronological phases. Then 
we spend some time understanding the nuances of the Uruguay Round of GATT 
negotiations, the birth of the World Trade Organization and the achievements of 
the Uruguay Round. The  next section is dedicated to the important rounds and 
ministerial conference of the WTO negotiations. We would then move on to 
understand the drawbacks of the multilateral negotiations and the reasons for the 
failure of the WTO rounds, particularly the Do ha round.  Towards the end, we 
would introduce the debate over whether regionalism acts as the “stumbling 
blocs” or “stepping stones” to multilateralism and try to analyze the way forward 
for multilateralism.  
13.2  GENERAL AGREEMENT ON TARIFFS AND 
TRADE 
After World War II, the United States emerged as the economic and political 
superpower and became proactive in creating a new international economic 
system. However, the major bone of contention that continued between the USA 
and the UK was preferential tre atment to trading partners. Agreement between 
the two was reached with the formulation of the “Charter for the International 
Trade Organisation”. According to the Charter, it was agreed that existing 
preferential agreements would be excluded from the “gene ral rule”, but the 
members must, by no means, increase trade restrictions and over time should 
negotiate with each other to not only reduce the restrictions but eliminate them 
altogether. The only condition under which trade restrictions could be imposed 
was to overcome balance -of-payment difficulties. The Economic and Social 


--- Page 5 ---
 
 
 
57 
Multilateral Trading 
System: 
Development and 
Challenges 
Council of the United Nations called for a conference to establish the 
International Trade Organisation (ITO). Eighteen countries held four meetings 
during October 1946 and March 1948 and the Charter for an ITO was signed by 
53 nations in March 1948.  
The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) emerged as a by -product 
of the negotiations meant for the formulation of the ITO Charter. The idea was 
that, once the Charter comes into e xistence, GATT would automatically expire. 
The GATT was signed by 23 countries on October 30, 1947, during one of the 
meetings of the preparatory committee for the ITO held in Geneva, and entered 
into force on January 1, 1948. 
The GATT was signed to establish a rules-based world trading system that would 
facilitate mutually advantageous trade. Baldwin (2016) identifies four phases of 
GATT based on the timing of GATT Rounds. 
Phase 1 (1947 – 1960): The first phase of GATT rounds began with substantial 
tariff reduction in the 1947 inaugural Geneva Round. However, the previous 
rounds considered details of rules and accessions such as those of Germany 
(1951) and Japan (1955) and not tariff reduction. Moreover, tariffs were not the 
main trade hindrance to internat ional trade in the 1950s. Instead, restrictions 
remaining from wartime, along with state trading and inconvertible currencies, 
were the binding constraints. 
Phase 2 (1960 – 1972): The second phase of the GATT rounds was triggered by 
the European regional trade liberalization. The Dillon Round (1960 -61) dealt 
with the tariff concessions European members had to make to other GATT 
members in compensation for the formation of their customs union. The Kennedy 
Round (1963-1967) was basically an effort b y the United States, Japan and other 
large exporters to compensate for the trade diversion ensuing out of the European 
customs union. There was substantial reduction in tariffs in the developed nations 
by 1967. This was due to both GATT and non -GATT steps like elimination of 
tariffs across much of Europe, and the US -Canada Auto Pact of 1965. This was 
the phase when both regionalism and multilateralism thrived simultaneously. 
However, tariffs in low -income nations did not fall since GATT rules excused 
them from reciprocally cutting their tariff in GATT talks. This is an exception to 
the non-discrimination principle called "Special and Differential Treatment" for 
developing-nation members. 
Phase 3 (1973 – 1979): This phase also witnessed simultaneous advanceme nt in 
regionalism and multilateralism. The Tokyo Round of GATT coincided with the 
expansion of the European Union. Several political and economic factors 
emerged soon after the launch of the Tokyo Round of negotiations. Developed 
countries experienced econ omic downturn and increasing difficulties with their 
balance of payments. Rising unemployment and inflation led them to think about 
bringing back protectionist trade policies and, as a result, trade liberalization 
seemed impossible and the negotiations alm ost reached a standstill. 


--- Page 6 ---
 
 
 
58 
Globalisation Consequently, the developed countries agreed to focus on making world trade 
fairer rather than freer. It was recognized that tariffs were only one factor 
influencing international trade and put non -tariff measures in the spotlight  of the 
negotiations. The negotiations on agriculture presented the greatest difficulty 
with the US and the EEC (European Economic Community) differing 
considerably at the onset. However, by July 1977 both parties reconciled their 
major differences regardi ng market access and subsidies. The Swiss formula, a 
mathematical (non -linear) formula which would cut high tariffs to a greater 
extent than lower tariffs, was adopted by the major participants and applied to a 
wide range of products. It was decided that m ost of the tariff cuts would be 
implemented in eight equal annual installments. Despite these reductions in tariff 
and non-tariff barriers, the Tokyo Round of negotiations fell short of expectations 
for the developing economies. 
Phase 4 (Mid 1980s):  In 1986, GATT members launched the Uruguay Round. 
The United States and Canada initiated a bilateral FTA (free trade agreement). 
The EU expanded to include Spain and Portugal while launching the Single 
Market Program. Effective tariffs fell gradually in t he developed nations, mostly 
due to regional trading agreements rather than the multilateral negotiations. The 
developing nations also initiated regional trading agreements (RTAs) like 
MERCOSUR (Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay) and the South African 
Customs Union (SACU). Thus, this phase predominantly saw tariff reductions by 
developing countries – both with their regional trading partners and with the rest 
of the world.  
13.3  THE URUGUAY ROUND 
The Uruguay round was launched at Punta del Este, Uruguay , in September 
1986.  It ultimately led to the creation of the World Trade Organization (WTO). 
The WTO officially commenced on 1 January 1995 under the Marrakesh 
Agreement, signed by 123 nations on 15 April 1994, replacing the GATT. 
13.3.1  The Negotiations and the birth of the WTO 
In November 1982, a major new negotiation was intended at a ministerial 
meeting of GATT members in Geneva which stalled on agriculture and ended up 
in a failure. After four years of negotiations, the round was launched  in 
September 1986, in Punta del Este, Uruguay. The negotiating agenda included 
almost every outstanding trade policy issues. Two years later, in December 1988, 
ministers met again in Montreal, Canada. The deadlock continued and the 
officials met again in April, 1989 at Geneva. Some concessions on market access 
for tropical products, aimed at assisting developing countries, were made. 
Further, a streamlined dispute settlement system and the Trade Policy Review 
Mechanism came into existence.  
 


--- Page 7 ---
 
 
 
59 
Multilateral Trading 
System: 
Development and 
Challenges 
The ministers met once more in Brussels, in December 1990. But they disagreed 
on how to reform agricultural trade and decided to extend the talks. This time the 
multilateral negotiations were almost on the verge of collapsing. However, 
amount of technical work continued in the background leading to the first draft of 
a final legal agreement. This draft “Final Act” was compiled by Arthur Dunkel, 
the then GATT director -general, and tabled in Geneva in December 1991. The 
text fulfilled every part of the Punta del Este manda te, with one exception. It did 
not contain the participating countries’ lists of commitments for cutting import 
duties and opening their services markets. The draft became the basis for the final 
agreement. Negotiations continued for the next two years. Apart from agriculture, 
services, market access, anti -dumping rules and the proposed creation of a new 
institution became the major points of disagreement, particularly between the US 
and the EU.  
In November 1992, the US and the EU settled most of their dif ferences on 
agriculture in a deal known informally as the “Blair House accord”. By July 1993 
the “Quad” (US, EU, Japan and Canada) announced significant progress in 
negotiations on tariffs and market access. The negotiations continued till 15 
December 1993 till every issue, including market access for goods and services, 
was resolved. Finally, on 15 April 1994, the deal was signed by ministers from 
most of the 123 participating governments at a meeting in Marrakesh, Morocco 
and the World Trade Organization (WTO) came into existence. 
13.3.2  Achievements of the Uruguay Round 
According to the World Trade Report (2007), “the amount of ground covered by 
the Uruguay Round was impressive: twenty -five thousand pages detailed all 
aspects of the Agreement”. The ten -page WTO Charter, that precedes the 
document, provides an “umbrella that embraces all parts” and “establishes the 
WTO as international organization and defines its functions and structure”. 
Further, it contains four annexure –  
Annex 1: the three major agre ements, namely on goods (GATT 1994 and 
eighteen related agreements), services (GATS and Annex 1 B), and 
trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights 
Annex 2:  the Dispute Settlement Understanding  
Annex 3:  the Trade Policy Mechanism 
Annex 4:  four Plurilateral Agreements that only apply to those Members who 
signed them 
The major achievement of the Uruguay Round in terms of tariff is that the 
developed countries agreed to cut their tariffs on industrial goods from an 
average of 6.3% to 3.8%, with m ost of the cuts to be phased in over five years 
starting from 1 January, 1995. Another major achievement was the increase in 
bindings of tariffs by all parties. Measured by the number of bound product lines, 


--- Page 8 ---
 
 
 
60 
Globalisation developed countries increased their percentage f rom 78% to 99%, transition 
economies from 73% to 98%, and developing economies from 21% to 73%. This 
increase was in some measure because all tariffs on agricultural goods were 
bound. The high percentage of bound tariffs culminated in a world trading system 
that is more stable and predictable.  
The Uruguay Round was the first time that the multilateral trading system 
succeeded in covering agricultural trade in a substantive manner (World Trade 
Report, 2007). The programme for liberalizing agriculture was se t for ten years. 
The approach was segmented into three categories – market access, domestic 
support and export subsidies. All agricultural tariffs were bound.  
Another major achievement of the Uruguay Round was the Agreement of 
Textiles and Clothing. All the parties agreed to remove all quantitative barriers in 
this sector in the coming ten years.  
Agreement on Safeguards provided more stringent rules on the temporary use of 
safeguard measures as well as dealing with compensation issues. In addition, it 
eliminated the use of so -called “grey -area” measures, such as voluntary export 
restraints (VERs). For the first time a definition of subsidies was established, and 
clearer rules and procedures were developed.  
The new rules on anti-dumping further clarified the rules on the determination of 
dumping, the use of anti -dumping measures and causality between dumping and 
injury. Procedures for initiating and conducting anti -dumping investigations and 
implementation of anti-dumping measures were elaborated. 
The Dispu te Settlement System underwent a major overhaul in the Uruguay 
Round. All trade disputes between members were to be handled by the Dispute 
Settlement Body under the New Agreement with a more structured process and 
stricter deadlines to ensure prompt dispute settlement. 
The Trade Policy Review Mechanism (TPRM) was introduced as an instrument 
to review trade policies and practices of WTO Members and thereby to 
contribute to improved adherence to WTO rules through greater transparency. 
Each review consists of two documents – a policy statement prepared by the 
government under review, and a detailed report written independently by the 
WTO Secretariat (World Trade Report, 2007). 
Two very important results of the Uruguay Round were the establishment of the 
General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) and the Agreement on Trade -
Related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). The GATS was introduced for a 
freer and fairer trade in services among the WTO signatories. The GATS 
distinguished between four modes of services trade: cross-border trade (Mode 1), 
consumption abroad (Mode 2), commercial presence abroad (Mode 3), and 
movement of natural persons (Mode 4). The TRIPS Agreement covers copyright 
and related rights, trademarks including service marks, geographical indi cations 
including appellations of origin, industrial designs and patents. The Agreement is 


--- Page 9 ---
 
 
 
61 
Multilateral Trading 
System: 
Development and 
Challenges 
comprised of three main features – substantive intellectual property standards, 
domestic enforcement provisions and dispute settlement.  
Check Your Progress 1 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Briefly discuss the four phases of GATT. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Explain how was WTO created and why? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Highlight any three achievements of the Uruguay round.  
 …………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
13.4 THE WTO ROUNDS 
In this section, we will briefly discuss the different ministerial conferences and 
rounds of negotiations that occurred after the formation of the WTO.  
13.4.1  The Singapore Ministerial Conference 
The First WTO Ministerial Conference was held in Singapore during 9 -13 
December, 1996. Though the talk of a new round was already in the air (Chile 
was calling for the initiation of discussions to prepare for a new round of 
negotiations on agriculture), neither the Singapore Ministerial Conference, nor 
the Ministerial Round of Geneva were directly associated with the launch or 
conduct of the Doha Round. 
The most important aspect of this ministerial conference is that it initiated 
discussions on what was later christened as the Singapore issues. It initiat ed 
debates on labour standards and the implementation of the Uruguay Round 
agriculture and textile agreements. Achievement of this conference included the 
near-completion of the Information Technology Agreement, adoption of the 
Comprehensive and Integrated Plan of Action to assist least -developed countries 
(LDCs) and the signing of a cooperation agreement with the International 
Monetary Fund. 
There were differences among the developed and developing nations from the 
beginning in the WTO negotiations. Though  some nations tried to bridge these 
gaps, the member nations predominantly clubbed together in a North -South 
fashion on nearly all the issues. 


--- Page 10 ---
 
 
 
62 
Globalisation The four issues which were initially proposed by Sir Leon (England) were –  
1) Information Technology Agreement and the telecommunications negotiations  
2) Financial services  
3) Picking up of new subjects like investment and competition 
4) Labour standards and environmental protection  
However, the issues (Singapore Issues) that prevailed were –  
1) Investment  
2) Government procurement  
3) Competition policy and  
4) Trade facilitation 
Labour was the most controversial of all the issues. Most of the ministers had 
expressed some views on this issue at the Marrakesh Conference in 1994. 
However, not much had changed between that valedictory GA TT ministerial and 
this inaugural WTO ministerial. Both the International Labour Organization 
(ILO) and the Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development 
(OECD) had taken up the issue of trade and labour standards in between. 
However, this labour issue was not settled until the ministers decided on 
collaboration between ILO and WTO. On the one hand, the developed countries 
wanted to ensure legal compatibility between the multilateral environmental 
agreements (MEAs) and the WTO system. On the other hand, developing 
countries raised concerns over “green protectionism”. Malaysia, for example, 
pointed out that the indiscriminate use of labelling schemes was instrumental in 
undermining developing countries’ exports. Other developing nations proposed 
that the best means of addressing labour and the environment is indirect – 
through greater economic growth rather than direct instruments that may be 
abused for protectionism. Despite these divisions, the ministerial declaration took 
a more accommodating appro ach to the environment than it did to labour issues. 
The ministers agreed to establish the Committee on Trade and Environment as a 
permanent body of the WTO. 
The Uruguay Round had earlier failed to meet the members' expectations on the 
investment issue. Di ssatisfaction regarding the Trade -Related Investment 
Measures (TRIMs) led the developed nations to pursue a Multilateral Agreement 
on Investment in the OECD. Though negotiations were still underway at the time 
of the Singapore Ministerial Conference, they collapsed two years later. 
The issue of competition policy was more complex. Countries failed to chalk out 
a single, accepted definition of the subject. It culminated with the formation of 
the GATS and the Agreement on Trade -Related Aspects of Intellectual  Property 
Rights (TRIPS Agreement). Both the agreements contained provisions relating to 
fair conditions of competition and international cooperation to facilitate the 
control of anticompetitive practices. 
