--- Page 92 ---
 
 
188 
Major Issues 
Confronting Indian 
Economy 
income has tended to be higher in those States where a larger proportion 
of population is engaged in tertiary occupations. 
2) Location pattern of industrial growth in the past had been influenced by 
the early pattern of railway construction.  These centres of industrial 
location, therefore, in conformity with Gunnar Myrdal’s thesis, have 
attracted a considerable portion of industrialisation towards themselves 
because of conglomeration economies. 
3) Historically, the developed states have had relatively more efficient 
systems of governance in terms of skills, responsiveness, and quality of 
delivery systems.  Unlike capital – which is highly mobile across regions 
and continents – good governance cannot be transplanted in an area, as it 
evolves basically within the prevailing socio-political structure over a 
long period.  An outmoded social structure can never bring about or 
sustain good governance in the modern sense.  On the contrary, it can 
frustrate exogenous attempts at good governance by its debilitating and 
corrupting influence. 
4) A related historical factor has been the development of infrastructure.  
The better developed regions owe it to their inbuilt infrastructure dating 
back to the time when they were still princely states.  In other regions the 
princely states did not pay much attention to the development, priding 
themselves on being messengers of God or something believing they 
were born to rule. 
5) Similarly, in more recent times, there has been substantial decline in the 
government’s budgetary support for financing infrastructure.  Developed 
states and, especially large cities and towns have been the major 
destinations for domestic institutional funds as well as external 
assistance. 
6) Operations of the term-lending institutions as also the commercial banks 
have also shown a distinct tendency towards concentration of 
investments in the relatively more developed States. 
Subsidised lending by banks for financing priority credit and refinancing 
facilities given by financial institutions have helped the richer states to 
gain greater access to investible funds at subsidised rates. 
Likewise, the approach of full cost recovery for urban basic services and 
strict financial discipline on state governments by the RBI has resulted in 
the further concentration of funds in the developed states and larger 
cities. 
7) There exist glaring regional imbalance and disparity among different 
states in the country in the provision of educational and training 
facilities, specially the technical education. 
8) Operations of the system of public finance in the country have also 
contributed to the creation and aggravation of inter-State disparities. 


--- Page 93 ---
 
 
189 
Regional Disparity in 
India: Policy 
Implications
 In the low income States, the level of public investment, 
infrastructural growth and standard of administrative services are 
lower compared to those in the high income States, thus perpetuating 
disparities. 
 The system of sales taxation enabled the richer states to export a 
significant portion of their tax burden to the residents of poor states. 
 Subsided lending to the states from the Central Government has led 
to regressive inter-governmental transfers. 
9) With increasing globalisation, India has chosen a skill-intensive path to 
growth; wages for skilled labour are already being bid up.  In this 
situation, it is necessary for firms to have scale to ensure the proper use 
of scarce skilled labour. But it is only in the fast-growing state that the 
environment and infrastructure exist for scale. This further identify 
disparities. 
10) In the pre-reform period, the public sector had played a crucial role in 
maintaining regional equality by directing resources to backward areas.  
With a change in the focus of the public sector following the reforms, 
this process has become weaker. 
The economic reforms gave greater freedom and impetus to the private sector 
and export-oriented production. These sectors, which were attempting to 
reduce costs and become competitive, were attracted to areas that were 
relatively more developed.  As a result, investment and activity shifted to 
these areas, strengthening the forces of divergence. 
In short, the richer states are rich because of relatively developed 
infrastructure and higher infrastructure spending.  A positive significant 
correlation is observed between infrastructure and real per capita gross state 
domestic product across states. 
24.8 MEASURES TO REMOVE REGIONAL 
DISPARITIES 
The Convergence Theorem postulates that when the growth rate of an 
economy accelerates, initially some regions with better resources would grow 
faster than others.  But after some time when the law of diminishing marginal 
return sets in, first growth rates would converge, due to differential marginal 
productivity of capital (higher in poorer regions and lower in richer regions), 
and this in turn would bridge the gaps in the level of income across regions. 
However, in India, as brought out above, there is no conclusive evidence of 
convergence so far. 
The various programmes undertaken to remove/reduce regional disparities 
can be identified as follows: 
1) Resource Transfers from the Centre to the States, Weighed in 
Favour of Backward States: The resource transfers, take place via  the 
Finance Commission in the form of plan and non-plan transfers.  The 


--- Page 94 ---
 
 
190 
Major Issues 
Confronting Indian 
Economy 
location of Central projects and Centrally-sponsored schemes are 
determined in the planning process by the NITI Aayog in collaboration 
with the relevant wings of the Government. A good initiative taken by 
Government of India to develop backward area is the ‘Aspirational 
Districts Programmes’ (ADP). The ADP are those districts which are 
affected by poor socio-economic indicators. The improvement of these 
districts can lead to a overall improvement in human development in 
India. A total of 115 districts were identified from 28 states, at least one 
from each state. In this initiative all the ministries have assumed the 
responsibility to drive the progress of the identified districts. The 
development is being monitored by the real time progress through 
updating the database of development indicators. The five areas in which 
development taken place are Health and Nutrition, Education, 
Agriculture and Water Resources, Financial Inclusion and Skill 
Development, and Basic Infrastructure. The broad contours of the 
programme are convergence, collaboration and competition. 
2) Priority given to Programmes which spread over the entire Area 
within the Shortest Possible Time:  Programmes of agriculture, 
community development, irrigation and power, transport and 
communications and social services have the widest coverage, and aim at 
providing basic facilities and services to people in all the regions.  Since, 
these programmes are included in State plans, it is largely through the 
shape given to State plans and the changes through which they pass in 
the course of the plan period that the benefits of development are carried 
to every part of the country. 
3) Provision of Facilities in Areas which Lag Behind Industrially:   
River valley projects from the most important segment in the plans of 
several States and large investments have been made in multi-purpose 
projects.  These and other projects are essential for the development of 
vast regions in the country, some of which suffer from scarcity or 
unemployment or are otherwise poorly developed.  The implementation 
of agricultural production and community development programmes, and 
of education and health schemes also carries the benefits of development 
to the remotest areas. 
4) Programmes for the Expansion of Village and Small Industries:  
Village and small industries are spread all over the country and various 
forms of assistance provided by the Central and State Governments are 
made available in the areas according to programmes which are 
undertaken. Industrial estates have been set up in all States, and 
increasingly, they are being located in smaller towns and rural areas. 
5) Diffusion of Industrial Activity: In the location of public sector 
projects, the claims of relatively backward areas have been kept in view 
wherever this could be done without giving up essential technical and 
economic criteria.  The location of several important projects has been 
determined on the basis of expert study and on economic considerations.  
But as they are situated in areas which were hitherto industrially 
backward, the latter will benefit. 


--- Page 95 ---
 
 
191 
Regional Disparity in 
India: Policy 
Implications
While in the selection of sites for basic capital and producer goods 
industries, proximity to raw materials and other economic considerations 
have naturally been important, it is felt that in a wide range of consumer 
goods and processing industries, it is possible to foster a regional pattern 
of development. 
To some extent, the development of new processes and new uses of raw 
materials has assisted in the spread of industry.  In encouraging such 
development, care has of course to be taken to ensure that a balance is 
maintained between regional distribution and considerations of economy 
in production. 
6) Schemes for Development of Backward Areas:The present policy for 
the development of backward areas comprises a set of special schemes 
under which plan funds are provided over and above the funds allocated 
for general sectoral programmes.  The special schemes can be classified 
as follows: 
 Schemes focusing on areas with special features   (the desert 
development programme, the drought-prone area programme, the 
command area development programme, the hill area development 
projects and sub-plans, the North Eastern Council set-up, and the 
tribal area sub-plans and tribal development agency projects). Also 
central assistance for special area programmes such as Hill Area 
Development Programme (HADP) and Western Ghats Development 
Programme (WGDP), Border Area Development Programme 
(BADP) are the targeted area development programmes. 
 Schemes focusing on target group (small farmers’ development 
agencies and the special component plan for Scheduled Castes). 
 Schemes providing incentives and concessions   for particular 
activities in backward areas (concessional finance from financial 
institutions, tax relief, investment subsidy, transport subsidy, and 
priority in raw material allocations and hire-purchase of machinery, 
for industries located in 246 backward district/areas, and relaxed 
viability and loan repayment terms for extensions of electricity by 
the Rural Electrification Corporation in backward areas). 
24.8.1 Major Limitations 
1) A great drawback of all schemes is that there is hardly any feedback 
about the actual physical progress of these schemes in the field.  There is 
a widespread feeling that most of the plans are paper plans without 
techno-economic teeth and without a corresponding real action on the 
ground.  Leakage of vast funds into the bureaucracy itself and/or the 
local oligarchy is also suspected. 
2) Although the amounts of funds earmarked for area development schemes 
nominally appear to be large, the total development outlays per capita 


--- Page 96 ---
 
 
192 
Major Issues 
Confronting Indian 
Economy 
available to less-developed areas remain small in comparison with those 
in the more developed regions. 
3) The effects of industrial and transport subsides remain unevaluated.  But 
the scrappy evidence available suggests that subsidies have an 
inducement effect only if basic infrastructure is accessible. 
4) There was no uniformity and consistency of norms for identification of 
backward areas from different States and Union Territories for either 
income tax concession or Central investment subsidy scheme and 
licensing. As a result, the existing procedures for selection of backward 
areas may have detracted from the potency of the provision in promoting 
the growth of regions and areas which were backward in all India 
perspective. 
24.9 WAY FORWARD 
A recent study on the subject suggests following measures, per se, for 
balanced regional development: 
1) Investment in agriculture needs to be stepped up especially in the lagging 
regions.  The backward and forward linkages of agriculture in poorer 
regions need to be emphasised more.  Investment in water harvesting, 
soil conservation, rural roads, warehouses, processing activities and 
promotion of high value crops should be emphasised.  Since agricultural 
growth is found to be different in different regions, steps to equalise it 
will certainly reduce the regional imbalances. 
2) Service sector has been found to be the new driver of the growth process, 
the banking and insurance sector and infrastructure have contributed to 
acceleration of growth in many states.  There is a need to promote these 
sectors, on priority, in backward regions. 
3) Improvement in basic infrastructure facilities like power, transport, 
telecommunication, and irrigation in backward states is a precondition to 
improve the quality of life of people and to usher in sustainable 
development in them. Availability of assured power supply, developed 
transport system and modern telecommunication facilities are important 
factors to attract private investments in these states. 
4) Devolution of financial Resources: The formulae according to which 
Centrally-collected resources are transferred to the States should be made 
steadily more progressive.   The 14
th Finance Commission considerably 
increased the devolution of tax from centre to states from 32 per cent to 
42 percent. The different criteria followed for devolution of finance from 
centre to states are (a) population, (b) area, (c) income distribution, tax 
collection, (d) forest cover etc.  Besides the taxes devolved to states, 
another source of transfers from the centre to states is grants-in-aid. As 
per the recommendations of the 14 th Finance Commission, grants-in-aid 
constitute 12 per cent of the central transfers to states.  The grant in aid 


--- Page 97 ---
 
 
193 
Regional Disparity in 
India: Policy 
Implications
as recommended by 14 th Finance Commission, are for three purposes 
such as: (i) disaster relief, (ii) local bodies, and (iii) revenue deficit. 
 Further, it needs to be pointed out that backward regions within states are 
not considered when Centre-State transfers are set.  Moreover, it is not 
the fact or size of such transfers that affects poverty but how such 
transfers are used.  In view of this, it is necessary that unit of resource 
allocation ought to be district rather than States, with highest priority 
given to the most backward districts.  Here also instead of spreading the 
butter too thin by scattering funds and concessions all over the place, it 
could be more beneficial to concentrate on intensive resource 
deployment by identifying the priority investment areas on the basis of 
industrial backwardness. 
5) Direct public sector investment by the Central Government in the states 
is likely to dry up gradually due to severe budget constraint of the 
Centre. Under the above circumstances, and important factor that 
influences the economic progress of a state is the quality of governance 
and the state level policy environment.  A better administered state is 
more efficient in raising revenues and putting them to better use.  They 
are the states, which will attract more investment both from domestic and 
foreign sources.  Such states are also in a position to prepare viable 
projects and successfully bid central assistance or external funding.  
Hence, governance needs to be given immediate attention, especially in 
the backward states. 
6) In the coming years, a key factor affecting choice of location in 
investment decision-making will be environmental policies of states.  
Global rules and agreements are creating demand for a coherent set of 
policies related to the environment, particularly for the extractive 
industries such as oil and metals.  The states need to pay more attention 
to this aspect. 
Ultimately, the key to balanced regional development lies not merely in 
increasing resource flows to backward regions but in creating an enabling 
environment to attract more resources, using them properly and assuring a 
fair deal to investors.  The overall investment climate and governance need to 
be upgraded. 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) List the causes of regional disparities. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 


--- Page 98 ---
 
 
194 
Major Issues 
Confronting Indian 
Economy 
2) State the role of term-lending institutions in narrowing down the regional 
disparities. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
3) What are some of the steps taken by Govt. of India towards removing 
regional disparities? 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
24.10 LET US SUM UP 
Regional disparity in India has been a major challenge for planners and 
policymakers. Despitea number of development programmes overtime, 
regional disparities have persisted.  Regional disparities are observed in 
growth rates, per capita SDP, per capita consumption expenditure, sectoral 
contribution to GSDP, agricultural development, Industrial development, 
infrastructural development and also in human development outcomes.  The 
important factors responsible for regional disparities are: variation in the 
occupational structure of workers, historical factors like variation in 
infrastructure development, decline in budgeting support for financing 
infrastructure, financial institutions, provision of education and training 
facilities etc. Various programmes have been launched towards removal of 
regional disparities.  However, all these schemes and programmes have 
suffered from several limitations and a lot need to be done for ensuring 
balanced regional development. 
24.11 TERM-END EXERCISES  
1) In the context of regional disparity, what do you mean by multiplier 
accelerator mechanism?  How will you examine the regional disparities 
of a country? 
2) What do you mean by the term regional disparity? Examine the sectoral 
disparities in India. 
3) Empirically examine the role of infrastructural development in 
explaining the regional imbalances in India. 
4) Critically evaluate the various steps taken by Govt. of India towards 
removal of regional disparities.  Which suggestions would you like to 
overcome the problem of regional imbalances?  


--- Page 99 ---
 
 
195 
Regional Disparity in 
India: Policy 
Implications
24.12 KEYWORDS 
Regional Disparity : 
 
‘Regional disparity means divergence or 
inequality of characters, phenomena or 
processes having specific territorial allocation 
(can be allocated in defined territorial structure) 
and occurring at least in two entities of the 
territorial structure’. 
Backwash Effect and 
Spread Effect 
:
 
 
Once economic and social forces occur in 
favoured region development produce a state of 
disequlibrium. According to Myrdal once an 
economy obtains a growth advantage it will tend 
to keep it. The cumulative movements of labour, 
capital, and trade which tend to economically 
weaken region were termed backwash effects. 
The benefit of trade will accrue to the host 
region. The spread effect or positive externalities 
is that such a new growth stimulus might induce 
other region, such as increased demand for 
backward areas product, diffusion of technology 
and knowledge. However, the spread effects are 
weaker than backwash effect, and interregional 
differences remain widen. 
GDP and NDP :
 
 
Gross domestic product (GDP) refers to the 
market value of all final goods and services 
produced within a country in a given period. The 
net domestic product (NDP) equals the gross 
domestic product (GDP) minus depreciation on 
a country’s capital goods. 
The credit-deposit 
ratio 
:
 
 
The credit-deposit ratio is one of the most 
widely used banking indicators for analysing the 
role of banks in promoting productive sectors 
and contributing to economic growth. In a bank-
based financial system, the CD ratio assumes 
greater significance as an aggregative measure 
for gauging the effectiveness of credit delivery 
system. Higher the CD ratio implies for greater 
credit orientation of banks. 
Human Development 
Index 
:
 
 
The Human Development Index (HDI) is a 
composite statistic used to rank countries by 
level of “human development”, taken as a 
synonym of the older term standard of living. 
This is a comparative measure of life 
expectancy, literacy, education and standards of 
living. 
 


--- Page 100 ---
 
 
196 
Major Issues 
Confronting Indian 
Economy 
24.13 REFERENCES 
1) Vorauer, K. Europäische Regionalpolitik Regionale Disparitäten. 
Theoretische Fundierung, empirische Befunde und politische Entwürfe. 
Passau: Münchener Geographische Hefte, (1997). ISBN 3-932820-01. 
2) Alois Kutscherauer, Hana Fachinelli, Miroslav Hučka, Karel Skokan, Jan 
Sucháček, Petr Tománek, Pavel Tuleja, (2010). ‘Regional disparities in 
regional development of the Czech Republic’, 2010WD-55-07-1, VŠB-
Technical University of Ostrava, Faculty of Economics.  
3) Mera, K (1975). Income Distribution and Regional Development, 
University of Tokyo Press, Tokyo. 
4) Myrdal, Gunner (1957). Economic Theory and Underdeveloped Regions, 
Gerald Duckworth and Co Ltd, London. 
5) Hirschman, A(1958). The Strategy of Economic Development, Yale 
University Press, New Haven. 
6) Kuznets, S (1963). "Quantitative Aspects of the Economic Growth of 
Nations, V111. Distribution ofIncome by Size", in Economic 
Development and Cultural Change Vol Xl, No 2, Part 11, pp 1-45. 
7) Bhattacharya BB, Sakthivel S (2004). Regional Growth and Disparity in 
India: Comparison of Pre- and Post-Reform Decades. Economic and 
Political Weekly, 39(10): 1071-77. 
8) Kar S, Sakthivel S (2007). Reforms and Regional Inequality in India. 
Economic and Political Weekly, 42(47): 69-77. 
9) Puga D (1999). The Rise and Fall of Regional Inequalities. Eur. Econ. 
Rev., 43: 303-34. 
10) Kim S (2008). Spatial Inequality and Economic Development: Theories, 
Facts, and Policies. Commission on Growth and Development Working, 
Washington DC. 16.  
11) Papola, T.S, Nitu Maurya, Narendra Jena(November 2011). Inter 
Regional Disparities in Industrial Growth and Structure, Institute for 
Studies in Industrial Development, New Delhi  
12) Anjani Kumar, Sant Kumar, Dhiraj K. Singh and Shivjee (2011). ‘Rural 
Employment Diversification in India: Trends, Determinants and 
Implications on Poverty’ Agricultural Economics Research Revie, Vol. 
24 (Conference Number) 2011 pp 361-372. 
13) Postel, Sandra. (1999). Pillar of Sand: Can the Irrigation Miracle Last?, 
New York & London: WW Norton & Company. 
14) Lin Yang (2017). ‘The relationship between poverty and inequality: 
Concepts and measurement, London School of Economics and Political 
Science, CASEpaper 205/LIPpaper 2, downloaded from 
http://sticerd.lse.ac.uk/dps/case/cp/CASEpaper205.pdf 
