--- Page 111 ---
 
 
207 
Ingredients of 
Good Governance3) What could be meant by meta-governance? 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
25.3 GOOD GOVERNANCE  
Whether governance, irrespective of context, is good or bad, fair or foul, 
proper or faulty, smart or dull, ethical or unethical, and healthy or poor, is an 
important issue. But such notions are normative and this is what differentiates 
good governance from governance. Philosophically, governance itself must 
have been evolved to conduct societal affairs in certain desirable directions. It 
is true that norms may differ somewhat from society to society and within a 
society from time to time. Fair governance, good governance, sound 
governance, humane governance, and effective governance are expressions of 
normative notions of governance in a positive direction and have clear 
prescriptive connotation. Since norms are expressions of a people’s social 
preferences, howsoever aggregated, good governance is expected to ensure 
these preferences into political decisions.  
Goodness of anything is defined by certain parameters. Whether a man is a 
good man is determined by certain qualities. People might differ on what 
those qualities are, yet it is expected there exists a universal set of core 
values. The same is true of good governance. One scholar, perusing 
international development literature on good governance, found it so 
confusing as he discovered that good governance may mean so many 
different things to different organisations and to different actors within these 
organisations. For instance, human rights scholars will look from that angle 
and UN Human Rights agency actually asks: Are the institutions of 
governance effectively guaranteeing the right to health, adequate housing, 
sufficient food, quality education, justice and personal security? IMF would 
prefer to dwell on those institutions and processes which concern foreign 
exchange and trade. Good governance may thus have endless concerns and 
definitions that it becomes difficult to find a core.    
However, some scholars have chosen to define good governance as 
‘legitimate, accountable, and effective ways of obtaining and using public 
power and resources in the pursuit of widely accepted social goals’, thus 
linking good governance with the rule of law, transparency and 
accountability, and partnerships between state and society, and among 
citizens. Others referred to it as ‘all kinds of institutional structures that 
promote both good substantive outcomes and public legitimacy’. Thus, some 
prefer to put emphasis on the process and others on the institutions while 
both sets of scholars refer to outcomes. Again, whether legitimacy is about 
the process or inputs or about outputs and outcomes. The literature offers 
different conceptualisations of good governance, in which the political 


--- Page 112 ---
 
 
208 
Major Issues 
Confronting Indian 
Economy 
content of good governance varies and is controversially discussed. Narrow 
definitions confine themselves to administrative processes and broad 
definitions cover all political aspects from formation and constitution of 
different government wings to decision-making process involving all 
stakeholders and implementation of those decisions. Showing its disgust with 
the focus of good governance being on ‘almost exclusively on economic 
processes and administrative efficiency,’ the UNDP, since 2002-HDR and 
thereafter, preferred to use the term ‘democratic governance’, perhaps, in 
order to draw even more attention to the political dimension.  
As indicated earlier, the term of good governance originated in international 
development literature sponsored by several multilateral agencies that are 
interested in economic development and particularly in poverty eradication. 
Though general ends are similar, they differ in details of normative ends. 
Therefore, unsurprisingly, different organisations are found to define 
governance and good governance somewhat differently. For instance, human 
rights agencies will look from rights perspective while financial agencies will 
be more concerned with accountability and corruption. Yet, they all 
deliberate on how public institutions ought to conduct public affairs and 
manage public resources.  
Taking the cue from UNESCAP’s definition in terms of the process of 
decision making and the process of implementing decisions, good 
governance can be better defined as effectiveness and efficiency in the 
process of decision making and the processes by which decisions are 
implemented. This is how Centre for Good Governance in India attempts to 
define it in its report on Good Governance Index: Assessment of State 
Governance. But it is a narrow approach as it does not explicitly state the role 
of non-state agencies.  
Finally, the debate whether means have to be legitimate or the ends have to 
be legitimate or legitimate ends justify the means, will continue. For Gandhi, 
means had to be pure and, for Marx or Mao, ends justified the means. So, 
some definitions will look towards processes whether they are legitimate and 
follow rule of the law while others will look towards outcomes as to how 
good they are there. Some definitions (in fact, agencies and scholars) have 
tendency to mix up the two. Therefore, despite wide usage of the term, its 
meaning and scope are not always clear. While this flexible position enables 
one to have a contextual application, the very lack of conceptual clarity is a 
source of some difficulty. Some scholars found good governance to have 
become a “one-size-fits-all” buzzword lacking specific meaning and content. 
Yet, it is better to have many ways to look at rather than none. 
 Check Your Progress 2 
1) Which agency started the campaign for good governance and why?  
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 


--- Page 113 ---
 
 
209 
Ingredients of 
Good Governance2) Why are there so many definitions of good governance? 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
3) Differentiate between input legitimacy and output legitimacy. 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
25.4 VARIANTS AND VERSIONS OF GOOD 
GOVERNANCE  
The previous sections, though quite enlightening, leaves an impression that 
good governance is almost an indeterminate term even in international 
development literature. Generally speaking, it is about the quality of conduct 
of public affairs and management of public resources by public institutions –
including authorities, they differ on normative accounts, which are often 
justified on the grounds that they are thought to be conducive to promote 
certain ends. There ought to be no surprise on the state of affairs in this 
context.  
There is another set of literature which is less confusing which propose 
democratic governance, public governance, Humane Governance, SMART 
Governance. We choose to discuss the latter two.  
Humane Governance 
Though the term ‘humane governance’ was proposed long back by a political 
scientist Rajni Kothari in 1987, in the context of paradoxes that existed and 
exist in the contemporary times. Pointing towards ‘paradoxes of 
overproduction and scarcity, of information explosion and increasing 
ignorance, of proliferation, of commodities and shrinkage in nature’s 
diversity, of affluence and poverty, of liberalisation and human rights 
violation, of States that are at once too strong and too vulnerable’, he finds 
‘ecocide and ethnocide are no longer imaginary scenarios created by 
doomsday prophets’. Written for some Committee for a Just World Peace, he 
bemoans the marriage between the State and the corporate business, and gave 
a call for moving from government of humans to humane governance. 
Subsequently, the phrase was used in the context of good global governance 
as if to reform the United Nations.   
 


--- Page 114 ---
 
 
210 
Major Issues 
Confronting Indian 
Economy 
The Mahbub-ul-Haq Human Development Centre in 1999 took human 
development perspective and viewed Humane Governance as good 
governance that seeks to secure human development. Holding ownership, 
decency, and accountability as the bedrock principles of humane governance, 
it unfolds Humane Governance into political, economic, and civic (instead of 
social) dimensions. Good political governance seeks riddance of the state 
from interest groups, lobbyists, and politicians with short-sightedness (and so 
are the voters interested in low taxation, high private gains, and freebies and 
civil servants who are interested in building their own empires.) Good 
political governance would seek to include:  
1) Decentralisation and deconstruction of power to afford people ample 
opportunities to participate in decision-making. 
2) Accountability and transparency of elected representatives and public 
officials. 
3) Full access of all citizens to prompt and affordable justice. 
4) Elimination of all forms of discrimination, and  
5) Maintenance of peace and social cohesion within and between states.      
Humane Governance proponents accept that role of government has 
increased over time.  Despite classical and neoclassical economists’ 
reservations, they point out, ratio of government expenditure to GDP in the 
OECD countries has increased from 10 per cent in 1913 to 20 per cent in 
1937 to 50 per cent by 1995. Even in the developing countries, the central 
government expenditure has risen from 15 per cent of GDP in 1960 to 30 per 
cent by 1985. Yet, they point out, fiscal crisis has not been unknown and 
governments have miserably failed in directly productive activities and thus 
state’s capability has been found inadequate to its responsibility. Therefore, 
while accepting the inevitability of neo-liberal order, the proponents of 
human development seek good economic governance in terms of those 
competitive policies that make market a fairer place by insisting on 
elimination of discrimination against weaker sections including women. In 
addition, good economic governance also seeks sufficient budgetary 
provisions for priority social sectors, progressive taxation and subsidy 
systems, and equitable access to credit and land. Good political and economic 
governance would entail strong institutions as institutions finally determine 
the efficiency of market functioning.  
Economists and political scientists have largely been ignoring the civic 
dimension in which individuals, families, and communities frequently 
operate. As freedom to form association is a basic human right and very often 
a constitutional one, business associations, trade unions, religious 
organisations, and various forms of NGOs (such as voluntary associations, 
community-based organisations, philanthropic trusts, and research 
foundations) have a definite and distinctive role in self-help, self-initiative, 
and self-development. In erstwhile Soviet Union, this was completely 
missing. Flourishing civic organisations will not only assert for rights but 
also engender responsibility. Self-policing is the best policing.  


--- Page 115 ---
 
 
211 
Ingredients of 
Good GovernanceIt is rightly suggested that each of the three dimensions are complementary to 
the other two; they are intractably linked; and they together achieve human 
governance.  
SMART Governance 
However, in India, acronym SMART was coined to denote  Simple, Moral, 
Accountable, Responsive and Transparent. SMART governance owes its 
origin to politicians’ reliance on e-resources as their use was found to be 
more dependable in terms of pace but also making rent-seekers less powerful. 
E-governance is the vehicle through which SMART governance has been 
sought to be achieved.  
The Eleventh Report of Second Administrative Reforms Commission is 
named as “Promoting E-Governance – The SMART Way Forward”. 
Defining e-Governance as the application of Information and 
Communications Technology to government functioning in order to create 
‘Simple, Moral, Accountable, Responsive and Transparent’ (SMART) 
governance, the Report recommends use of ICT for wider participation of 
citizens in public affairs in decisional processes. E-Governance and SMART 
governance are a kind of twins. E-Governance can however be useful only 
when processes, procedures, and structures of Government are re-engineered 
and made compatible with ICT requirements in terms of software and 
hardware. There is no denying that ICT can to an extent accommodate 
specific structures as no two governments would be a replica of each other. 
Thus, SMART Governance is more than using technology.  
E-governance is surely different than E-government which nevertheless is an 
essential part of the former. If G and C were to stand for government and 
citizens respectively, and ‘2’ for ‘to’, then there could be four kinds of 
communications: G2G, G2C, C2G, and C2C. While G2C, besides G2G, is 
very much part of e-Government as government is essentially to deliver 
certain services to citizens, it is C2G communication whereby citizens 
become participants which is what ought to be e-Governance. C is inclusive 
of all other stakeholders, like business, labour, civil societies. G2C is very 
similar to business-customer relationship B2C in e-Commerce where B and C 
respectively denote business and customer and C2G is similar to C2B. E-
governance seeks to move from passive information and service providing to 
active citizen involvement.  
No doubt, E-governance is a highly complex process requiring provision of 
hardware, software, and networking but it is the re-engineering of procedures 
for decision-making which holds the water. And as ICT is dynamic, e-
governance too will have to be a dynamic. One can recall that many of the 
cards that are in our possession are smart and the move is to have a smart 
citizen card wherein most of the information is tagged in. In many places, it 
is bio-metric information in lodged in. 
Let us note how these attributes of good governance are spelt: 
• Simple: Meaning simplification of rules, regulations and processes of 
government through the use of ICTs and thereby providing for a user-


--- Page 116 ---
 
 
212 
Major Issues 
Confronting Indian 
Economy 
friendly government. For example, government may use Single Window 
one-stop service to facilitate delivery of services to a common citizen. E-
governance comes handy. 
• Moral: Connoting emergence of an entirely new system of ethical values 
in the political and administrative machinery. Technology interventions 
can improve the efficiency of anti-corruption agencies, police, judiciary, 
etc. if they wish. Electoral reforms, empowerment of women, enhancing 
literacy, etc. could also be also carried out in a better way through ICT 
intervention. Use of EVM in elections in India helped improve the 
fairness of elections. 
• Accountable: F acilitating design, development and implementation of 
effective Management Information System and performance 
measurement mechanisms and thereby ensuring accountability of public 
service. Through ICT intervention, accountability can be ensured in more 
efficient ways. 
• Responsive: Streamlining the processes to speed up service delivery and 
make system more responsive.  For instance, Citizen Charter as a set of 
assurances given by the government agencies, is an instrument on the 
quality of service delivery. Through ICT intervention, responsiveness 
could be quickened.  
• Transparent: Bringing information hitherto confined in the government 
files, into public domain and making processes and functions transparent. 
Transparency brings some of the essential virtues into public life such as 
equity, level playing field and the rule of law. They reduce the scope of 
discretion and corruption. Right to Information (RTI), the right to know 
why certain decisions were taken, is an instrument of transparency. E-
governance would be helpful in quick dissemination of information.  
Commentators on SMART Governance sometimes relate these features with 
the work of bureaucracy which is greatly responsible for the formulation and 
implementation of various programmes and policies of the government. 
Though not included in the acronym, SMART approach is expected to enable 
people’s participation, beyond elections, in decision-making. It is further 
expected that SMART approach to governance makes government efficient, 
bereft of hierarchical barriers and red tap. 
Automation of administrative processes, the first step of e-governance, will 
minimise human intervention leading to bias less service delivery and 
availability of online information for each department will enable file 
movement faster and user friendly by reducing paper-work (and thus saving 
physical space and exploitation of environment. With E-Governance, public 
action comes under media and public glare, and thereby inducing norms and 
values of accountability, openness, integrity, fairness, equity, responsibility 
and justice. They expect reduction in transaction costs, empowerment of 
common citizens. SMART Governance and its sister e-Governance are thus 
harbinger of the new century ethos.  


--- Page 117 ---
 
 
213 
Ingredients of 
Good GovernanceHowever, it appears that SMART Governance largely concentrates on the 
working of public sector – mainly bureaucracy. It is indeed so. That is why it 
was favoured by the Second Administrative Reforms Commission whose 
main mandate was reforming administration and was promoted and 
propagated by the Department of Administrative Reforms (and Public 
Grievances).  
It may be noted that both humane governance and SMART governance 
belong to two different genres. While the former is more about judging the 
quality of governance process in terms of humane outcomes, the latter is 
judging the quality of administrative processes. The schism is substantially 
akin to that between the end and the means. SMART Humane Governance is 
using e-technology but will be judged by the quality in terms of humane 
governance outcomes. 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) What is humane governance? State its components.   
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
2) What are the features of SMART Governance and how does it differ 
from E-governance? 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
25.5 DIMENSIONS OF GOOD GOVERNANCE  
The World Bank, as proposed in its Worldwide Governance Indicators 
Project, defines good governance in terms of the traditions and institutions by 
which authority in a country is exercised. As noted in Section 25.3, there are 
three dimensions, viz.: 
1) The process by which governments are selected, monitored and replaced;  
2) The capacity of the government to effectively formulate and implement 
sound policies; and  
3) The respect of citizens and the state for the institutions that govern 
economic and social interactions among them.  


--- Page 118 ---
 
 
214 
Major Issues 
Confronting Indian 
Economy 
While this description is fraught with a number of issues. The main stem does 
not say anything which qualifies governance as good though they include 
constitutional arrangements in (1), government personnel in (2), and nature of 
people and their State in (3). The qualification of ‘sound’ before policies 
would mean different things for different groups of people and agencies. 
While economy-centric people would look for efficiency, society-oriented 
ones would search for equity. The inclusion of ‘sound policies’ in the second 
dimension raises the question whether international experts (mostly 
economists) can really be expected to know what constitutes ‘sound 
policies’? For example, should pensions or health care or education be 
privately or publicly funded or should they be imparted physical provisions 
or through insurance? This broad definition can further be criticised for 
mixing together policy content (‘sound policies’) and procedures (‘rule of 
law’) as well as citizens’ evaluations (‘respect’). The mixture refers to both 
institutions that provide access to political power and those that exercise and 
implement laws and policies. To what extent and how should financial 
institutions be regulated? Obviously, some political institutions or aspects of 
politics are more important than others in determining the quality of 
governance. If we examine other definitions, they are likely to meet the same 
fate. The result is Grindle wanted Good Governance to ‘rest in peace’ (in a 
paper in 2017) as he found proliferation of muddy thinking on governance. 
So, we only note dimensions suggested in some of the contributions by 
international agencies.  
While making good governance index, the WGI in 1996 clearly unfolds six 
dimensions by splitting three aspects mentioned above. They are:  
1) Voice and accountability;  
2) Political stability and absence of violence;  
3) Government effectiveness;  
4) Regulatory quality;  
5) Rule of law; and  
6) Control of corruption.  
In contrast, the UNDP has identified five areas of intervention along which 
governance could be improved:  
1) Legislature, judiciary, and electoral bodies;  
2) Public and private sector management;  
3) Decentralisation and local governance;  
4) Civil society organisation, and  
5) Governance in special circumstances.  
There is little common between them. But, in another policy document in 
which UNDP admits importance of good governance suggests nine criteria, 
viz.: 
1) Participation  


--- Page 119 ---
 
 
215 
Ingredients of 
Good Governance2) Rule of law  
3) Transparency  
4) Responsiveness  
5) Consensus-orientation  
6) Equity  
7) Effectiveness and equity 
8) Accountability, and  
9) Strategic vision  
The OECD countries seem to include another set of ten criteria:  
1) Effectiveness  
2) Efficiency  
3) Transparency  
4) Accountability  
5) Predictability  
6) Sound financial management  
7) Fighting corruption  
8) Respect for human rights  
9) Democracy   
10) The rule of law.  
By 2013, it stopped using the phrase good governance in its Human 
Development Report and suggested governance principles for democratic 
governance through following three double criteria:  
1) Participation and Inclusion,  
2) Non-discrimination and Equality, and  
3) Rule of Law and Accountability. 
This tilts more towards political side than administrative. There are quite a 
few things common.  
One can easily make a distinction between the administrative core of good 
governance – which is a legitimate part of government and a closely 
associated political area – which involves people in governance. Principles 
such as accountability, efficiency, transparency or the rule of law, belong to 
the first category, that is, administration while respect for human rights, 
participation and democratisation belong to political area.  
Various other international agencies including those of UN System and 
outside have also put their neck into the matter. They also try figure out some 
common dimensions, without criticising others, but finally end up differing. 
It would be instructive to prepare a comparative chart of representative sets 
of dimensions and ingredients listed by some of these agencies in some or the 


--- Page 120 ---
 
 
216 
Major Issues 
Confronting Indian 
Economy 
other place. We choose here one or the other affiliate of the UN System or 
the World Bank’s regional counterparts, which have not been discussed in the 
preceding paragraphs.  
UNESCAP UNESCAP/ 
UNDP 
UNCHR IDA ADB AfDB 
Participation Participation Participation Participation Participation Participation 
Accountability Accountability Accountability Accountability Accountability Accountability 
Transparency  Transparency Transparency Transparency Transparency 
Efficiency  Effectiveness     
Fairness Equity     
 Rule of Law  Rule of Law   
  Responsiveness    
Decency      
  Responsibility    
    Predictability  
     Combating 
Corruption 
     Legal & Judicial 
Reforms 
One can notice agency’s concerns reflected as well as regional variations. 
Maximum common dimensions come out to be only two: Participation and 
Accountability. It means, in the agencies’ estimate, people seek their 
participation in decision making, which is very much expected in a 
democratic dispensation and they wish to hold authorities to be accountable 
for their actions. 
Moreover, beyond enumeration, the agency narrations may add new 
dimensions. For example, the UNESCAP further writes, “it (good 
governance) assures that corruption is minimised, that the views of the 
minorities are taken into account, and that the views of the most vulnerable in 
society are heard in decision-making. It is also responsive to the current and 
future needs of society” 
Check Your Progress 4 
1) List three key attributes of good governance. 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
