--- Page 62 ---
 
 
158 
Major Issues 
Confronting Indian 
Economy 
5) Name the instrument which add human rights to social security. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
23.3  OBJECTIVES OF SOCIAL SECURITY 
The primary objectives of social security are to:  
1) Generate confidence among individuals and families that their level of 
living and quality of life will not erode by social or economic 
uncertainties. 
2) Provide medical care and income security against consequences of 
defined contingencies. 
3) Facilitate the victims’ physical and vocational rehabilitation. 
4) Prevent or reduce ill health and accidents in the occupation. 
5) Protect against unemployment by maintenance and promotion of job 
creation. 
6) Provide benefit for the maintenance of children. 
23.4  APPROACHES TO SOCIAL SECURITY 
Social security is a very comprehensive term. The two important means of 
providing social security are social insurance and social assistance. 
23.4.1 Social Insurance 
It is a method to provide benefits to persons of small earnings, which 
combine the contributions of the beneficiaries with subsidies from the 
employer and the state. In this case the beneficiaries, employers and the 
Government make contributions towards the creation of a common pool, out 
of which benefits are paid to the members in the event of any contingency. 
Thus, social insurance is a co-operative device which aims at granting 
adequate benefits to the insured on the compulsory basis in time of 
unemployment, sickness and other emergencies. 
23.4.2  Social Assistance 
Social assistance refers to the assistance rendered by the society to the poor 
and needy persons without placing any obligation on them to make any 
contribution to be entitled to relief as in the case of workmen’s compensation, 
maternity benefit and old age pension etc. Thus, one may say that a social 
assistance scheme provides benefits to persons of small means granted as of 


--- Page 63 ---
 
 
159 
Social Security 
Measures in India
right in amount sufficient to meet a minimum standard of need and financed 
from taxation. 
Social assistance represents the unilateral obligations of the community 
towards its dependent group. It is provided by the society or the government 
to the poor and needy individual. The important features of social assistance 
are: (i) the whole cost of the programme is met by the State and local units of 
Government (ii) benefits are paid as of legal right in prescribed categories of 
need (iii) in assessing need, a person’s other income and resources are taken 
into account, certain resources such as a reasonable level of personal savings 
are disregarded. 
23.5  SOCIAL SECURITY SCHEMES IN INDIA 
Legislation provides the general welfare by establishing a clear-cut system.  
It extends the rights and obligations of its own nationals. Social security 
schemes are dependent on social security legislations. Each country made its 
own law/advisory to protect its citizen through legislative enactments.  
The social security legislation in India derives its strength and spirit from the 
Directive Principles of the State Policy (DPSP) and the subjects enlisted in 
the Concurrent List. Two important social issues mentioned in the 
Concurrent List (List III in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India) 
are; 
Item No. 23: Social Security and insurance, employment and unemployment. 
Item No. 24: Welfare of Labour including conditions of work, provident 
funds, employers’ liability, workmen’s compensation, invalidity and old age 
pension and maternity benefits.   
Besides this, there are a few articles in the constitution which distinctly relate 
to social security issues.  They are: 
Article 38: State to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of the 
people. 
Article 39 (a):  The state to direct its policy towards securing the citizens, 
men and women equally, the right to an adequate means of livelihood. 
Article 41: Right to work, to education and to public assistance in certain 
cases. 
Article 42: Provision for just and humane conditions of work and maternity 
relief. 
Article 43: Work Living wage, good conditions of work, full enjoyment of 
leisure, for all kinds of workers. 
Drawing from ILO Conventions on Social Security, and some of the 
legislations made by Government of India for social security along with the 
schemes are as follows: 
 


--- Page 64 ---
 
 
160 
Major Issues 
Confronting Indian 
Economy 
23.5.1 Social Insurance 
1½ The Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 
It provides benefit to workers, in the event of sickness, maternity and 
employment injury, in the form of payment of sick leave, hospitalisation, etc. 
The scheme provides two types of social security cover namely - (a) Medical 
Care and (b) Cash Benefits. Medical care is provided to the insured persons 
and their family members through a vast network of panel clinics, ESI 
dispensaries and hospitals generally within the vicinity of their residential 
areas. The cash benefits on the other hand include Sickness benefits, 
Maternity benefits, Disablement benefit, Benefits after retirement, 
Dependents’ benefits, Funeral Expenses, Rehabilitation allowance, and 
Standard benefits. 
Employees State Insurance Corporation administers this Act. It covers every 
establishment in which 10 or more employees are employed or were 
employed on any day during the preceding twelve months, other than a 
seasonal factory 
2½
 The Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 
1952 
An important scheme under this Act is Employees’ Provident Fund Scheme, 
1952. But beneficiaries of this scheme are also entitled to get benefit under 
two more schemes namely (a) Employees’ Pension Scheme, 1995, and (b) 
Employees’ Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme, 1976. The schemes are 
administered by a tripartite body headed by Labour Minister. Employees 
Provident Fund Organisation functions under the overall superintendence of 
Central Board of Trustees (CBT). 
i) Employees’ Provident Funds Scheme (EPFS), 1952 
The Act extends to whole of India, and is applicable to every establishment, 
specified in Schedule-I to the Act in which twenty or more persons are 
employed or any other establishment employing twenty or more persons or 
class of such establishment, the Central Government notifies in the Official 
Gazette. At present, 190 classes of establishments have been notified in 
Schedule-I of the Act. In case of Cine-Workers, the required employee’s 
strength for the purpose of coverage is five.  
The Act is not applied to any other establishment belonging to or under the 
control of the Central Government or a State Government or set up under any 
Central, Provincial or State Act and whose employees are entitled to the 
benefit of contributory provident fund or old age pension in accordance with 
any scheme or rule framed by the Central Government or the State 
Government governing such benefits. These establishments are called the 
exempted establishments. Though the functioning of these establishments is 
the responsibility of the Trusts of the respective establishments, the EPFO 
carries out regular inspections to ensure the compliance of conditions of 
exemption.   
 


--- Page 65 ---
 
 
161 
Social Security 
Measures in India
Number of exempted establishments was 3109 in the year 1994 which 
increased to 4365 in the year 2016. Growth of Un-exempted establishments 
was much higher than exempted establishments, during this period and their 
number increased from 233772 in the year 1994 to 926297 in the year 2016.  
There are two main benefits admissible under the provident fund scheme.  
First, the beneficiary gets accumulated amount along with interest at the time 
of retirement or resignation. Second, he can get partial withdrawals for some 
specific purposes viz. house construction, higher education, marriage, illness 
etc. 
ii) Employees' Pension Scheme (EPS), 1995 
The Employees’ Pension Scheme, 1995 came into effect on 16
th November, 
1995. With the introduction of this scheme the erstwhile Employees’ Family 
Pension Scheme, 1971 (EFPS) ceased to operate, and all the assets and 
liabilities of EFPS were transferred and merged with the Employees’ Pension 
Fund. The benefits and entitlements of the beneficiaries under the old scheme 
(EFPS) were protected and continued under the new EPS, 1995. 
The EPS has been designed on the principles of a ‟Defined Contribution - 
Defined Benefit” and adopts ‟actuarial principles” for ensuring long- term 
financial viability. It aims to provide economic sustenance during old age and 
survivorship coverage to members and his families. 
iii) Employees’ Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme (EDLIS), 1976 
Employees’ Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme came into force on 1
st August, 
1976. It is supported by a nominal contribution by the employers and no 
contribution is payable by the employees. The scheme covers all the 
employees of the establishments to which EPFMP Act, 1952 applies. 
Insurance benefit is provided in case of death of an employee who was 
member of the scheme at the time of death. Under the revised benefit under 
the scheme the family will get an amount linked to either the average balance 
in PF Account during preceding 12 months or 20 times of the average wages 
on which contributions were made during the last 12 months of the member 
subject to a maximum of Rs 6 lakhs, whichever is higher. 
3½ The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972  
It applies to every factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port and railway 
company and every shops or establishments having a minimum of 10 
employees, and provides for gratuity of payments at the end of service. To be 
eligible for gratuity the employees should have a minimum continuous 
service of 5 years. This Act provides for payment of a lump sum gratuity to 
the employees. Under the Scheme, Gratuity is payable @ 15 days wages for 
every completed year of service subject to monetary ceiling of Rs. 10.0 lakh. 
In the event of the death or disablement of the employee, the gratuity must 
still be paid to the nominee or the heir of the employee.  
Gratuity is exempted from taxation provided that the amount does not exceed 
15 days’ salary for every completed year of service calculated on the last 


--- Page 66 ---
 
 
162 
Major Issues 
Confronting Indian 
Economy 
drawn salary (subject to a maximum of Rs. 10 lakh). It is important to note 
that an employer can choose to pay more gratuities to an employee, which is 
known as ex-gratia and is a voluntary contribution. Ex-gratia is subject to tax. 
4) Enactment of the two Legislations relating to the Welfare of 
Construction Workers in the Year 1996 
In July 1996 two bills on construction workers were introduced in the 
Parliament which were approved by the Parliament resulting in the enactment 
of the Building and Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and 
Condition of Service) Act, 1996 and the Building and Other Welfare Cess 
Act, 1996.  
The Building and Construction Workers Act is applicable to the 
establishments which employ 10 or more workers in any building or other 
construction work and their project cost is more than Rs. 10 lakhs. There is a 
provision to constitute Central and the State Advisory Committees to advise 
the appropriate Governments in the matters arising out of the administration 
of the Act. Various items for which these committees can advise are: 
Constitution of Welfare Boards by the State Governments, registration of 
beneficiaries under the Fund, provision for regulating the employment and 
conditions of service, welfare measures for the construction workers. Further 
as per the Building and other welfare cess act, Central and the State Advisory 
Committees may advice for setting up a Welfare Fund at the State level to be 
financed by contribution from beneficiaries, levy of cess on all construction 
works at rates of 1 to 2 per cent of construction cost incurred by an employer 
and non-mandatory grants/loans from the State/Central Governments. 
With the efforts of Ministry of labour and employment, Government of India, 
States/UTs carried out the notification of Rules and formation of the Boards. 
As per the Act, these Boards have the authority to provide various social 
security schemes to their members. These may relate to health, education and 
old age protection. 
5)  The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(MGNREGA) 2005* 
Objectives of the Act 
i)  providing a rights based 100 days employment in a year to strengthen the 
subsistence livelihood support, enhancing the rural households 
purchasing power and capacity to alleviate hunger; and  
ii)  directing the colossus amount of wages towards creating productive and 
durable assets of irrigation, drought proofing, land and water 
conservation, horticulture and connectivity to general prosperous 
livelihood support system. The ultimate objective was to benefit the 
entire community by providing employment; raising agricultural 
productivity and increasing natural resource base, particularly water. The 
process envisaged to attain the objectives would result in strengthening 
*By virtue of being MGNREGA as job guarantee scheme. It is also mentioned as 
MGNREG Scheme (MGNREGS) 


--- Page 67 ---
 
 
163 
Social Security 
Measures in India
the grassroots processes of democracy and infusing transparency and 
accountability in governance. 
Features of the Programme 
i) The adult members of the rural households apply to the local 
panchayats seeking registration for employment;  
ii)  issue of job cards by the panchayat within 15 days from the date of 
application;  
iii) written application by the job card holders to the panchayat seeking 
employment;  
iv)  issue of dated receipt of written application for employment;  
v)  provision of employment within 15 days of application for work failing 
which payment of unemployment allowance;  
vi)  provision of work within a radius of 5 km from the village (payment of 
extra wages of 10 per cent, if the work provided is beyond 5 km);  
vii)  payment of wages as per the minimum wages act;  
viii)  provision of equal wages for men and women;  
ix)  disbursement of wages on a weekly basis;  
x)  women should constitute one-third of the workers;  
xi)  provision of facilities at the work site; 
xii)  shelf of project as recommended by the Gram Panchayat and approved 
by zilla Parishad;  
xiii)  permissible works are predominantly soil and water conservation, 
forestation and land development;  
xiv)  wage material cost ratio should be 60:40 (no room for machine and 
contractors);  
xv)  social audit has to be undertaken by the Gram Sabha;  
xvi)  institution of grievances redressal mechanism for ensuring responsive 
implementation process; and 
xvii)  all accounts are subject to public scrutiny resulting in accountability 
and transparency of the scheme. 
Working of the Programme 
MGNREGA is the first tangible commitment to the poor that they can expect 
to earn a living wage without loss of dignity and demand this as a right. 
MGNREGA has benefited the people especially the marginalised and the 
poor on several counts. Evidences from the field and the analysis of the 
macro data have brought to light the various merits of the scheme and its 
impact on the target beneficiaries.  
 
 


--- Page 68 ---
 
 
164 
Major Issues 
Confronting Indian 
Economy 
6)  Unorganised Workers’ Social Security Act, 2008 
The law aims at extending benefits to workers in informal sector/unorganised 
sector similar to that of formal sector/organised sector workers. The Act 
broadly covers life and disability, health and maternity benefits, old age 
protection, and any other benefit as may be determined by the Central 
Government. 
7) Domestic Workers Act, 2008 
It aims at regulating payment and working conditions of domestic workers 
and entitles every registered domestic worker to receive pension, maternity 
benefits and a paid weekly leave. 
8) Food Security  
Food security means the easy availability and access of food at all times in 
sufficient quantity in a safe and nutritious form to meet the dietary 
requirements and food preferences for an active, healthy and productive life. 
This should also be adequate in terms of quantity, quality and variety and is 
acceptable to culture. Food security is one of the pre-requisite for economic 
and social stability of a nation. The availability, access and stability are three 
important indicators which should be analysed in the context of food security.  
The National and State government’s implement different food security 
schemes to tackle food insecurity and malnutrition. These are related to 
various government sectors, since they seek to support agricultural 
production, distribution, purchase and use, as well as to ensure the provision 
of health and nutritional services, sanitation and others. Initiatives include 
subsidised food sales, school meals for targeted vulnerable citizens. They 
include longstanding schemes such as the Integrated Child Development 
Service (ICDS), which has been in place since 1975 and seeks to provide 
education, nutrition and health services to women and children; and recent 
initiatives such as the National Food Security Mission, launched in 2007, 
which aims to increase crop productivity.  
The most widely implemented food security scheme is the Public 
Distribution System (which later formed as Targeted Public Distribution 
System with some modification in its content, scope and objectives). Under 
the scheme, the government provides distribution of cereals, as well as sugar 
and Kerosine oil through fair price shops at subsidised price. The other 
important scheme on food security is the Antodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) 
which caters to the poorest of the poor section of population. Under these 
schemes, all the households are divided into Above Poverty Line (APL) and 
Below Poverty Line (BPL) based on the planning commission cut off 
income. These two groups are treated separately in terms of price and 
quantity of food grain. 
9)  Pension Fund Regulatory Development Authority Act, 2014 
In late nineties there was a critical challenge before India due to the 
enormous strain on revenue being provided due to government employees on 
the basis of defined pension benefits. Keeping this in view Government of 


--- Page 69 ---
 
 
165 
Social Security 
Measures in India
India decided to introduce a National Pension Scheme (NPS) based on 
defined contribution pension scheme for new entrants to Central Government 
service, except to Armed Forces, in the first stage, with effect from January 1, 
2004, replacing the existing defined benefit scheme. At the same time for old 
employees, existing defined benefits were not disturbed. 
Although an Ordinance was issued in the year 2004 to set up a statutory 
Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA) to 
administer National Pension Scheme, the Act became effective from 
February 1, 2014 after receiving the assent of the President. Under the Act 
PFRDA was set up to promote old age income security by establishing, 
developing and regulating pension funds and protecting the interests of 
subscribers to various schemes of pension funds. The ongoing schemes 
administered by PFRDA are: 
i) National Pension Scheme (NPS) for Central and State Government 
Employees  
Initially National Pension System was introduced on mandatory basis only 
for the new entrants to central government service (other than armed forces) 
who joined on or after 01.01.2004. After that it has been extended to state 
government employees also. At present all the states except West Bengal and 
Tripura have adopted NPS for their employees from the notified dates. Tamil 
Nadu has adopted contributory pension scheme under National Pension 
System (NPS), but it maintains the employees’ pension accounts itself. 
Beside this as on 31
st March, 2017, 528 central autonomous bodies and 806 
state autonomous bodies are registered under NPS.   
After joining the services, all the new employees who joined after January 1, 
2004 are to be registered under NPS on mandatory basis.  
ii) National Pension Scheme for Corporate Sector  
Companies can enroll their employees as members of NPS and provide 
retirement benefits to their employees. Instead of taking of their own, ‘the 
work of setting up and managing trusts, investing the funds and providing 
annuity’, they can use the NPS architecture. Companies decide about amount 
of contribution to be paid in the retirement account. All the contribution can 
be from the employer or from the employee or it can be shared by both in a 
decided proportion. The choice of fund manager as well as investment pattern 
can be either decided by the employer or the employer can give this choice to 
the employee. The periodic contributions can be either directly made by the 
employer to NPS or it can be routed through Point of Presence with which 
the company has tied up to provide the services. Subscribers have the 
portability facility in which they can transfer their retirement account across 
locations and between sectors. The subscriber can move the account from one 
employer to another employer or from the Corporate Sector to the All 
Citizens model, as the case may be. 
Until now individuals between the ages of 18 to 60 years could join NPS. In a 
significant move to expand pension coverage in the country, the maximum 
age for joining the NPS has been raised from 60 years to 65 years for the 


--- Page 70 ---
 
 
166 
Major Issues 
Confronting Indian 
Economy 
employees of corporate sector and self-employed. The move by PFRDA will 
enable people aged between 60 and 65 years to join NPS and make 
contributions to it until the age of 70 years. 
iii) All Citizen – Unorganised Sector Workers 
In May 2009, NPS was opened on voluntary basis for all Indian Citizens 
which includes the private sector and informal sector (unorganised sector) 
workers. Objective of extension of the NPS was to provide a low-cost 
retirement savings system to India’s informal sector workers. Alterations in 
the scheme were made to ensure that it is scalable, low cost, simple, portable 
and flexible. PFRDA allowed the enlisted Post offices, public sector banks 
and NGOs with local standing to open the accounts of these workers.  
The unorganised sector (All Citizens) Model of the NPS was available to all 
citizens of India, whether resident or non-resident. However, the applicant 
should be between 18–60 years of age as on the date of submission of his/her 
application. Recently the maximum age of self-employed has been raised 
from 60 years to 65 years. 
iv) Atal Pension Yojana 
Eligibility and Benefit of APY 
The scheme is open to all bank account holders who are between the age of 
18 years and 40 years. Under APY there is a provision for fixed pension for 
the subscribers ranging between Rs. 1000 to Rs. 5000. The contribution rate 
is low if subscriber joins early and increases if he joins late. 
Government co-contributes 50 per cent of the total contribution of the 
subscriber or Rs. 1000 per annum, whichever is lower, to eligible subscribers 
who have joined before 31
st March 2016; and also reimburses expenditure for 
the promotional and development activities including incentive to the 
contribution collection agencies to encourage people to join the APY. 
23.5.2  Social Assistance 
1½ The Employee’s Compensation Act, 1923 also known as The 
Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 
The Workmen’s Compensation Act is the oldest of the social security 
legislations intended for the welfare of workers. This Act makes it obligatory 
for the employers to provide compensation to workmen or their survivors in 
case of injuries and occupational diseases sustained during the course of 
employment and resulting in disablement or death. Compensation calculation 
is done as given below: 
a)  Death: 50  per cent of the monthly wage multiplied by the relevant factor 
(age) or an amount of Rs. 80,000, whichever is more. 
b)  Total permanent Disablement: 60 per cent of the monthly wage 
multiplied by the relevant factor (age) or an amount of Rs 90,000, 
whichever is more. 


--- Page 71 ---
 
 
167 
Social Security 
Measures in India
2)  The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961  
It provides maternity protection before and after childbirth, through payment 
of wages. The  amendment of this Act came into force on April 1, 2017, and 
increased some of the key benefits mandated under the previous Maternity 
Benefit Act of 1961. The amended law provides women in the organised 
sector with paid maternity leave of 26 weeks, up from 12 weeks, for the first 
two children. For the third child, the maternity leave entitlement will be 12 
weeks.  
The Act also secures 12 weeks of maternity leave for mothers adopting a 
child below the age of three months as well as to commissioning mothers 
(biological mothers) who opt for surrogacy. The 12-week period in these 
cases will be calculated from the date the child is handed over to the adoptive 
or commissioning mother. 
In other provisions, the law mandates that every establishment with over 50 
employees must provide crèche facilities within easy distance, which the 
mother can visit up to four times a day. For compliance purposes, this 
particular provision came into effect from July 1, 2017. 
This Act is applicable to (a) every establishment being a factory, mine or 
plantation including any such establishment belonging to Government; and 
(b) every shop and establishment in which ten or more persons are employed, 
or were employed, on any day of the preceding twelve months; and such 
other shops and establishments notified by the State Government after prior 
approval of the Central Government. 
3)  National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP)  
The NSAP, a 100 percent centrally sponsored programme is designed to 
provide protective social security to the very poor citizens. This is the first 
nationwide programme of cash transfer. This programme intends to provide 
social assistance benefits to poor households in case of old age, death of main 
breadwinner and maternity. The programme ensured that Central assistance 
does not displace States’ own expenditure in this respect and that the 
States/UTs may expand their own coverage of social assistance 
independently, wherever they wish to do so. The NSAP is implemented by 
panchyats and municipalities so as to make it more responsive and cost 
effective. The panchyats and municipalities are encouraged to play an active 
role in identifying the poor households. 
This programme comprises four pension and disability schemes for the 
elderly. These include the Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme 
(IGNOAPS), under which persons below poverty line (BPL) aged 60 years or 
above are entitled to a monthly pension of Rs. 200 up to 79 years of age and 
Rs. 500 thereafter. In case of Indira Gandhi National Widow Pension Scheme 
(IGNWPS), BPL widows aged 40 to 59 years are entitled a monthly pension 
of Rs. 200. Indira Gandhi National Disability Pension Scheme (IGNDPS) 
offers Rs. 200 a month to BPL persons 18-59 years with severe and multiple 
disabilities. 
