--- Page 121 ---
 
 
217 
Ingredients of 
Good Governance2) Reason why the list of attributes of good governance so widely differ 
between agencies.  
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
3) How do rights agencies and donor agencies differ in prescribing 
characteristics of good governance?  
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
25.6 GOVERNANCE IN INDIA 
Judging governance in any country requires knowing: 
1) Whether proper institutional structure of governance is in place? 
2) Whether proper mechanisms and procedures have been adopted? 
3) Whether proper roles have been assigned to different stakeholders and 
how well they play their roles? and  
4) Whether there exists a resilient framework for accommodating dynamics 
of the time?  
First, let us broadly know about the institutional structures and operational 
mechanisms as they exist in India. Then, we shall indicate, in brief, the state 
of affairs of governance.  
A Constituent Assembly, though through indirect elections, was constituted a 
little before Independence. Passing through turbulent times of facing partition 
of the country, and getting hundreds of princely states accessed to India and 
getting them turn into viable units, the Assembly could prepare a Constitution 
in three years’ time. Members put the final signatures by 26 November 1949 
but it was decided to promulgate the Constitution to replace the Government 
of India Act of 1935 on 26 January 1950 as 26 January 1930 was the day set 
for Complete Independence in Poorna Sawraj resolution carried out on 31 
December 1929 in the Session of the Indian National Congress which was 
held in Lahore. Since then the day of 26 January was celebrated as Poorna 
Swaraj Day for next 17 years.      
The Constitution adopted parliamentary form of government and provided an 
elaborate legal framework and institutional structures as well as mechanisms, 


--- Page 122 ---
 
 
218 
Major Issues 
Confronting Indian 
Economy 
and procedures for the three wings of government and three levels of 
government (local governments were explicitly incorporated in 1993). The 
Constitution guarantees certain rights to people vis-à-vis the State which is 
further guided by certain principles for governance of the country. They are 
called as Fundamental Rights (of people) and Directive Principles (of State 
Policy) respectively. It is generally accepted that they embody the concept of 
a Welfare State in India. Besides, there are provisions regarding oversight 
constitutional bodies like Comptroller and Auditor General of India and 
Election Commission besides Judiciary which is a wing of government. It 
may be noted that word Government is invariably used for the Executive 
Wing of the government – Government of India for the Union Executive and 
Government of a State for State Executive.  
The Fundamental Rights entitle people to certain rights that are enforceable 
by a court of law, such as the Right to Life, the Right to Freedom of 
Association, the Right to Freedom of Expression, and the Right to Education 
(since 2009), Equality before Law and Equal Protection under Law. Besides, 
a citizen of age 18 and above has a right to vote in elections to Parliament, 
State Legislatures and Local Governments. And one of age 21 is eligible to 
contest for membership in a local government, and one of 25 to House of 
Representatives (Lok Sabha) and Legislative Assemblies (Vidhan Sabha). 
Elections have also been organised frequently under the supervision of the 
Election Commission for Parliament and State Legislatures and State 
Election Commissions for local governments. Compared to several other 
countries, Indian elections have generally been fair and the process has 
generally been improving over time. But for this, India – the largest 
democracy – is also said to be a vibrant democracy. Many young leaders are 
making history by becoming Mayors of municipal corporation and Sarpanchs 
of gram panchayats in their 20s.  
Further, there exists an independent Judiciary that interprets the Constitution, 
upholds the Constitutional Rights of Indian citizens, punishes violations of 
the law of the land and also strikes down laws and policies made by the 
Executive that run counter to the provisions of the Constitution. The Supreme 
Court has adopted an innovative device of Public Interest Litigation (PIL) 
since 1980s to enable any person or civil society group to approach the court 
seeking legal remedies in cases where public interest is at stake. Higher 
judiciary has acted even on the basis of post cards/letters from individuals, 
articles in newspapers and petitions from a wide cross-section of people. The 
Supreme Court’s positive pronouncements in areas of civil liberties, and 
social, economic, and development rights have alerted people and 
governments alike.  
There are several watchdog institutions, some constitutional and some 
statutory. To name a few, there are the Comptroller & Auditor General 
(CAG), the Election Commission, the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC), 
the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) and the Reserve Bank of 
India (RBI), the National Green Tribunal (NGT) to oversee and check 
malpractices in areas coming under their respective jurisdictions. All States 
have Lokayuktas and a Lokpal has just been appointed at Union level in 


--- Page 123 ---
 
 
219 
Ingredients of 
Good Governance2019. They are empowered to look into cases of corruption against 
government officials, including CMs and PM. It took fifty years but finally it 
happened.  
There are also in existence National Commissions for Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes, Backward Classes, Women, and Minorities as well as 
National and State Human Rights Commissions to oversee the wrongs 
committed against the sections they are empowered to protect for their rights 
and promote their welfare.  
A little-known fact about the legislative wing of the government is the 
existence and work of Parliamentary Committees and Committees of the 
Legislative Assemblies, which function almost as ‘mini legislature’ and are 
there to scrutinise legislative and executive actions. Actually, they are also a 
link between people and legislature on the one hand and between legislature 
and government. In the Parliament, number of committees went on increasing 
over time. As of now, there are three finance committees of standing nature 
(Estimates Committee, Public Accounts Committee, and Committee on 
Public Undertakings); 24 Standing Committee related with Government 
Departments, 16 Standing Committees for other subjects, and 9 Ad Hoc 
Committees. A minister is not eligible for election or nominations to all such 
committees except a few in the ad hoc category which are either as Select 
Committees or Joint Parliamentary Committees. Select Committees examine, 
in consultation with the public and experts, legislative Bills brought before 
Parliament and recommend for the consideration of Parliament but can revise 
or reject them. For example, the National Identification Authority Bill, 2010 
was rejected.  Similar mechanisms exist in the Legislatures at the State levels. 
The system of parliamentary committees is becoming more and more 
consultative, as various stakeholders, including the state governments, 
present their cases before these committees. However, at times, some 
standing committees are not constituted and due diligence is not applied in 
the scrutiny of the bills. This is what happened in 17
th Lok Sabha. 
But governance goes beyond government. As is well-known, media is often 
considered as the fourth estate or fourth power/pillar of democracy in modern 
times as they can wield considerable power to influence the role of the three 
wings of the government.  Media in India is quite free and has been quite 
vigilant about public affairs. Sting operations have been a recent addition in 
its armoury to unearth corrupt practices. Media has exposed several unethical 
practices in public life; for example, corruption in the procurement of 
weapons for the armed forces, influencing and winning over of a witness for 
one of the parties to litigation, and the sale of S-Band spectrum to a private 
company by Antrix Corporation of the Department of Space, 2G scam, coal 
auction, commonwealth games, etc. The Press Council of India guards the 
freedom of the press. The Right to Information Act, 2005 has strengthened 
the media also, besides individuals. Many Government Organisations felt 
compelled to put up Citizens’ Charters to ensure transparency in their 
dealings. Then, there exists a modicum of think tanks in the country.   
Further, the role of non-governmental organisations (NGOs) cannot be 
belittled. They promote the participation of civil society in the governing 


--- Page 124 ---
 
 
220 
Major Issues 
Confronting Indian 
Economy 
process by (i) bringing forth the views of the public on various issues (ii) 
creating awareness about issues of importance, and (iii) fighting for the rights 
of the people or of specific sections of society. For instance, enactment of 
Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act in 2013 owes entirely to the agitation by NGOs. 
Private (corporate) sector also has its associations, chambers, federations at 
sectoral level as well as at regional, state and national levels. The same is true 
of other interests like non-corporate business which may organise at local 
level and may have federations. Labour, farmers, wholesalers, retailers and 
street vendors do organise as do residents through associations, forums, etc. 
India is full of them. They communicate among themselves as well as with 
the governments and agencies at various level. There are religious 
organisations and trusts which are guided by the law of the land. However, 
several oversights regulatory authorities had to be created to check the abuse 
of dominance. Competition Commission of India, SEBI, IRDAI, TRAI, 
ERCs, etc. are examples to be studied.  
In recent decades, quite a few developments have taken place in technology, 
the most important being in the area of information and communication. With 
development in ICT, e-Governance has been introduced with National e-
Governance Programme since 2006. Over the years, various government 
operations and services have been brought within its fold, especially at the 
cutting edge of administration to cut down delays in the delivery of services 
and reduce the scope for mal-practices and corruption. Most notable example 
of e-Governance is existence of the universalised Unique Identification 
Number to citizens through Aadhar card since 2009.  
Thus most of the institutional structures considered necessary for ensuring 
good governance exist in India and as, noted above, with some good 
governance outcomes. Yet, the present governance scenario in India is far 
from satisfactory, as indicated below.             
A majority of the people – the poor and the illiterate – is unaware of its 
entitlements. Rights violations do occur; the socially disadvantaged sections 
of society are at times maltreated and discriminated, socially segregated, and 
even physically assaulted and the police is often found to look the other way. 
Women, even the educated ones, fare no better. At times, it is felt that 
atrocities against women are rising. 
Notwithstanding the efforts of the Election Commission to rid the election 
process of the influence of money and muscle power, elections continue to be 
driven by these factors, thereby preventing a real competition for political 
power. There exists another worrying trend, which is the loss of Parliament’s 
and Legislatures’ time by disruption of proceedings – resulting into 
disruption of passage of bills. While increase in representation of women in 
legislatures has improved, the presence of industrialists, businessmen, traders 
and builders, and those from allied groups is rising; while the former’s share 
is 15 per cent that of the latter is reaching 25 per cent. Most people consider 
the former as welcome sign and the latter as bemusing. Only happy 
development people see in this regard that women, and at that young women, 


--- Page 125 ---
 
 
221 
Ingredients of 
Good Governanceare actively participating in local governments, thanks to positive approach of 
some States.        
One notice rampant corruption at all levels. Take any scheme, for example, 
MGNREGA, there are issues at implementation level. People often say that 
Indians are good at planning and bad in implementation. A plan which is 
cannot be implemented, is not a plan at all!  
For ensuring better behaviour from private corporate sector, Companies Act 
of 1956 has been replaced by Companies Act of 2013 whereby corporate 
governance has improved in the composition of board of directors, 
appointment of company secretary, corporate social responsibility. But it is 
found that rules are followed in letter but not in spirit. 
Check Your Progress 5 
1) State the institutional structure as provided in the Constitution of India 
towards good governance. 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
2) Who are the players that should be kept in mind while evaluating 
governance of the country?  
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
3) State the major oversight/watchdog institutions with their roles.  
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
4) Identify some of the major pitfalls in the governance of the country. 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 


--- Page 126 ---
 
 
222 
Major Issues 
Confronting Indian 
Economy 
5) Explain the role of civil society in India.  
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………… 
25.7 LET US SUM UP  
We started with introduction about the idea of good governance which made 
inroads across the board and the role in it played by the international/ 
multilateral aid and cooperation agencies for development, starting with the 
World Bank. Naturally, the unit first considered what governance means and 
how it can be distinguished from government and highlighted the importance 
of agencies within and outside government and various other players in 
societal affairs. But then, word governance found so great acceptance that it 
almost replaced administration and management from many contexts and 
with some qualifying adjective, it found place across sectors, modes, fields, 
areas, and goals.  
Though mal-governance was found to be major issue in non-success of aided 
projects, good governance attracted many definitions and descriptions from 
varied institutions. National governments adopted good governance but 
adapted somewhat different definitions – befitting their areas of interest. 
Scholars joined the debate and analysed contents of various conceptions in 
terms of implications. Some were found closer to administrative systems and 
others towards political systems. There is some kind of evolution over time 
and tilting towards democratic governance. Some found the developments 
quite bewildering. There were also suggestions for democratic governance, 
public governance, humane governance, SMART governance, and e-
governance. 
Several agencies put forward certain criteria to judge the quality of 
governance. There is some convergence but a lot of divergence. By and large, 
people’s participation in decision-making, transparency in administrative 
processes, accountability of government officials, and responsiveness/ 
responsibility of government departments/agencies were given as yardsticks 
of good governance. Rule of law and combating corruption also find favour. 
But then, depending upon an agency’s focus, other criteria are also 
mentioned. For example, those interested in human rights may suggest 
inclusion, fairness and equity.   
Finally, we discussed governance in India – institutional structure, 
mechanisms, and instruments as enshrined in the Constitution, other agencies 
and their roles thrown up by statutes, role of media and NGOs, contribution 
of influence groups and pressure groups, etc. However, everything is not 
hunky dory with governance in India and a few pitfalls and weaknesses are 
also pointed out.     


--- Page 127 ---
 
 
223 
Ingredients of 
Good Governance25.8 TERM-END EXERCISES 
1) Go through website https://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/ of 
Worldwide Governance Indicators Project and study the aggregate 
indicators for India. How has India fared in different dimensions? 
2) Read Chapter 8 of Human Development Report of the year 2011 
published by the UNDP and assess how the Principles of Governance 
enunciated therein are different from those in the Worldwide Governance 
Indicators.  
3) Visit the website of the OECD and read the section on OECD work on 
public governance. Pick up a topic of your interest and develop a 
narrative.  
4) Read the Eleventh Report of the Second Administrative Reforms 
Commission (of India). Evolve a brief story of e-Governance initiatives 
in India. 
5) Visit the website of one of the Commissions whether for SC, ST, or BC, 
as mandated by Art 338, 338A, and 338B respectively of the 
Constitution of India. Discuss the chosen Commission’s role in 
protection, welfare, and socio-economic development of relevant section 
of Indian society   
25.9 KEY WORDS 
UNESCAP : United Nations Economic and Social Commission for 
Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP) is the regional 
development arm of the United Nations in Asia and the 
Pacific, to promote cooperation among member States 
for creating a more interconnected region working to 
achieve inclusive and sustainable economic and social 
development. 
UNDP :  The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
is the global development network of the United 
Nations, to promote technical and investment 
cooperation among nations. 
UNHCR :  The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
(UNHCR) is a UN agency mandated to aid and protect 
refugees, forcibly displaced communities, and stateless 
people, and to assist in their voluntary repatriation, local 
integration or resettlement to a third country. 
IDA :  The International Development Association (IDA) is the 
part of the World Bank that helps the world’s poorest 
countries. It aims to reduce poverty by providing zero to 
low-interest loans (called “credits”) and grants for 
programs that boost economic growth, reduce 
inequalities, and improve people’s living conditions. 


--- Page 128 ---
 
 
224 
Major Issues 
Confronting Indian 
Economy 
ADB :  The Asian Development Bank (ADB) is a regional 
development bank aimed at promoting social and 
economic development in Asia. 
AfDB :  The African Development Bank Group (AfDB) is a 
multilateral development finance institution catering to 
African governments and private companies investing in 
the regional member countries (RMC). 
25.10 REFERENCES 
It would be worthwhile to visit websites of the World Bank, IMF, OECD, 
and United Nations’ agencies – particularly UNDP, UNESCAP, and 
UNESCO, to appreciate the evolution of the concept as well as differentiation 
between conceptualisations by various agencies. Reports of Second 
Administration Reforms Commission, particularly 11
th one, would also be 
very useful. Reports are available on the website of Department of 
Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances, Government of India. Read 
some scholarly articles which raise questions on the idea as promoted by 
international aid agencies. Some of the books and articles which would be 
very helpful, are: 
1) Grindle, Merilee S. (2017). Good Governance, R.I.P.: A Critique and an 
Alternative, Governance, vol. 30, issue 01 (January), pp. 17-22. 
2) International Monetary Fund (2017). The Role of the Fund in 
Governance Issues: Review of the Guidance Note – Preliminary 
Considerations (Background Notes)  
3) Kaufmann, Daniel; Kraay, Aart & Mastruzzi, Massimo (2010). The 
World Governance Indicators: Methodological and Analytical Issues – 
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 5430. 
4) Kuldeep Mathur (2008). From Government to Governance , National 
Book Trust, New Delhi. 
5) United Nations (2009). What is Good Governance? United Nations 
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific. 
6) UNESCAP (2011), What is Good Governance?, www.unescap.org).  
7) World Bank (1991).  Managing Development – The Governance 
Dimension, The World Bank, Washington DC. 
8) World Bank (1994). Governance; The World Bank’s Experience, The 
World Bank, Washington DC. 
9) World Bank (2002). World Development Report, 2002 “Building 
Institutions for Markets”, The World Bank, Washington, DC.  
10) World Bank (2007). A Decade of Measuring the Quality of Governance, 
The World Bank, Washington, DC.  


--- Page 129 ---
 
 
225 
Ingredients of 
Good Governance25.11 ANSWERS OR HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) Government is one, though an essential, part of a State and a mechanism 
of governing it whereas governance is the total way all societal affairs, 
particularly the public affairs, are conducted.     
2) Depending upon their mandates international agencies orient their way of 
operationising the idea of governance. For example, Human Rights 
agencies will focus more on rule of law whereas Financial agencies will 
focus more on corruption and public sector performance. 
3) Meta-governance is the framework of governance. For example, 
Constitution of a country is expected to provide the background for 
making the laws. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) The World Bank started the campaign as it discovered that the 
conditionalities attached with development project aids in 1980s did not 
bear the fruits and the major reason was bad governance. 
2) As the idea was lurking for long that there are substantial issues in 
governance in most of the countries but agencies other than World 
Bank/IMF found World Bank/IMF too much focused on public sector 
management or management of public resources. So was the case with 
scholars also. They added their own angles generally from the 
perspective of their disciplines.  
3) Administration is traditionally more interested in seeing whether the 
procedure/ processes in a particular case have followed the rule book. As 
that process may be a link in a long chain, it appears sensible also. 
However, taste of pudding is in eating. So, it was suggested that it has to 
be seen in total perspective. While the former is input legitimacy, the 
latter is output or outcome legitimacy. 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) Humane governance is good governance seeking to secure human 
development. Its components are political governance, economic 
governance, and civic governance.  
2) SMART in SMART governance stands for simple, moral, accountable, 
responsive and transparent. Acronym SMART sounds similar to smart 
which was already in use in the context of urban governance or cities 
which attempted to provide modern facilities and amenities to its 
populace.   
3) E-governance is an attempt to make good use of ICT tools in governance 
and it can help a great deal to improve the pace of good governance but it 
is not a substitute for SMART governance. 


--- Page 130 ---
 
 
226 
Major Issues 
Confronting Indian 
Economy 
Check Your Progress 4 
1) People’s participation in decision making, accountability of agencies to 
the people they serve, and responsiveness of agencies in solving the 
people’s issues.  
2) Mandates of the agencies, the time they are written, and the people who 
articulate them. 
3) Rights agencies, like United Nations High Commissioner for Human 
Rights or Amnesty International, will seek to protect and promote human 
rights whereas the World Bank or International Monetary Fund will like 
to see that aid projects are successfully conducted.  
Check Your Progress 5 
1) Better you have look at the Constitution of India. There are three levels 
of government. There are bodies/agencies prescribed by the Constitution 
and there are agencies created by statutes or organised for administrative 
convenience.  
2) Government departments, government wings and agencies, media, 
NGOs, people’s forums, section unions, trade unions, advocacy groups, 
business chambers and federations, and think tanks.  
3) Judiciary, particularly higher judiciary, is a watchdog for any excesses 
committed by governments and their agencies. Comptroller and Auditor 
General is another watchdog in the sphere of financial matters. Election 
Commission of India responsibly conducts/supervises the elections for 
legislatures, and offices of President and Vice President. State Election 
Commissions likewise conduct elections for local government in their 
respective States. There are others like National Green Tribunal for 
environmental issues and Lokpal/Lokayuktas for corruption in offices 
and by officers and officials – including PM and CM.    
4) It is an exercise for you!  
5) Civil society comes in various forms like voluntary associations, user’s 
groups, rights groups, sectional associations. Some cooperate and 
facilitate government in governance, others point out pitfalls and seek 
redressal. Some resolve societal issues on their own. 
