--- Page 1 ---
 
UNIT 6   INFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT   
Structure 
6.0 Objectives 
6.1  Introduction 
6.2   Types of Unemployment 
6.3 Phillips Curve 
6.4 Natural Rate of Unemployment 
6.5 Expectation-Augmented Phillips Curve 
 6.5.1 Phillips Curve under Adaptive Expectations 
 6.5.2 Phillips Curve under Rational Expectations 
6.6 Let Us Sum Up 
6.7 Answers/ Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
6.0  OBJECTIVES 
After going through this unit you should be able to  
 identify various types of unemployment; 
 explain the concept of natural rate of unemployment; 
 establish a relationship between unemployment and inflation; 
 explain how the short-run Phillips curve shifts; and 
 reconcile the difference in shape of the Phillips curve in short-run and long-
run. 
 
6.1 INTRODUCTION 
In Units 7 and 8 of BECC 103 we gave some preliminary ideas of inflation – its 
definition, causes and effects. In this Unit we describe the relationship between 
inflation and unemployment. In the process, we discuss various types of 
unemployment and its measurement. Recall that classical economists believed in 
dichotomy of real and monetary variables. Thus, inflation being a monetary 
variable should not have any effect on a real variable such as unemployment. 
Keynesian economists, however, believed that change in monetary variables 
could affect real variables.  
Inflation, as you know, is defined as a persistent rise or, a tendency towards 
persistent rise in the general level of prices . As and when there will be 
 
 Prof. Kaustuva Barik, Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi and Dr. Tarun 
Manjhi, Sri Ram College of Commerce, University of Delhi. 


--- Page 2 ---
 
80 
 
Expectations, Inflation 
and Unemployment 
 
increase in the general price level, purchasing power of households decline. 
Increase in inflation is likely to reduce the value of national currency and it’s vice 
versa. Although there are many types of inflation, it can be mainly classified into 
three types of inflation- demand pull (caused by increase in demand), cost push 
(cause by increase in cost of production) and built-in inflation (mainly caused by 
past events).  The rate of inflation could vary from a low level to a very high 
level. As of 2021, Venezuela for example has an inflation rate of nearly 10,000 
per cent per year.  
Unemployment is a state in which healthy person fails to get employment at 
prevailing wage. It is caused by various factors that are concerned with demand 
and supply. There are broadly six types of unemployment- structural (arises due 
to change in structure of economy, frictional (arises due to time gap between 
changing jobs), cyclical (arises due to change in cycle of economy i.e. boom, 
recession, etc.), seasonal (arises due to change in season), disguised 
unemployment (it is also called hidden unemployment where marginal product of 
labour is very much close to zero) and under employment in which better 
qualified person end with low quality, low paid jobs because of excess supply of 
labour and lower availability of job opportunity.    
6.2  TYPES OF UNEMPLOYMENT 
‘Labour force’ as a concept includes all persons in the age group of 16 years to 
64 years who are willing to work. Thus it includes both employed and 
unemployed persons. The persons not included in the labour force include those 
who are retired, too ill to work, keeping the house, or simply not looking for 
work.  
‘Work force’ as a concept is somewhat narrower – it includes the employed 
persons only. Thus the difference between the labour force and the work force 
gives us the number of unemployed.  
By employed persons we mean those who perform any paid work (thus 
homemakers are not included) and those who have jobs. On the other hand, the 
unemployed as a category includes people who are not employed but are actively 
looking for work. While considering unemployment we do not take into account 
those who are not in the labour force. We define unemployment rate as the 
number of unemployed divided by the total labour force. You should remember 
that the concept of unemployment implies ‘involuntary unemployment’. This 
concept implies that a person is willing to work at the prevailing wage rate, but 
cannot find work.  


--- Page 3 ---
 
   81 
 
Inflation and 
Unemployment 
There are three types of unemployment, viz., frictional, structural and cyclical. 
We explain the differences below. 
(i) Frictional unemployment: It takes place because people switch over from one 
job to another. In many cases the tenure of job gets over and workers remain 
unemployed till they get another job. In other cases workers migrate from one 
region to another in search of better jobs or opt to remain out of job for short time 
periods. Frictional unemployment takes place because in an economy with 
imperfect information, job search and matching is not smooth and there are 
frictions in the economy.  
(ii) Structural unemployment: It results from the mismatch between supply and 
demand for different kinds of jobs. For example, in recent years, the number of 
engineers and management professionals looking for jobs in India has been much 
higher than available jobs. This has resulted in a number of persons with 
technical qualification opting for low qualification jobs. Structural 
unemployment takes place largely due to structural shifts in an economy and 
adjustments to such shifts take time. A large number of educational institutions in 
India have discontinued their engineering education programmes. 
(iii) Cyclical unemployment: It arises due to fluctuations in aggregate demand, 
which is a part of business cycles. When aggregate demand declines, there is 
simultaneous decline in the demand for labour and consequent increase in 
unemployment. On the other hand, a general boom in the economy increases the 
demand for labour and unemployment decreases. Thus cyclical unemployment is 
pro-cyclical in nature.  
Empirical data shows that the labour force in an economy is much less than the 
total population. Total labour force in India, according to certain sources, is about 
50 crores compared to an estimated population of 138 crores in 2020. Persons 
above 65 years and children below 15 years of age however should not be taken 
into consideration while comparing the size of the labour force to total 
population. A relevant ratio in this context is the ‘Labour Force Participation 
Rate (LFPR)’. It is defined as follows: 
LFPR = Size of the labour force
Size of population in the age group of 16 − 64 years
 
The labour force participation rate (LFPR) varies across countries, and over time 
for the same country. If we take gender into account, there could be male labour 
force participation rate and female labour force participation rate. Usually, there 
is a gap between male LFPR and female LFPR. In India, for example, female 
LFPR is much lower compared to male LFPR. Further, there is a sharp decline in 
female LFPR in recent years. Such a decline could be due to cultural and 
structural issues.  
The rate of unemployment u is defined as the ratio of unemployed persons to 
total labour force. The rate of unemployment varies across countries and for a 
country over time.  
 


--- Page 4 ---
 
82 
 
Expectations, Inflation 
and Unemployment 
 
6.3 PHILLIPS CURVE 
The Phillips curve, named after A W Phillips, describes the relationship between 
unemployment and inflation. In 1958 Phillips, then professor at London School 
of Economics, took time series data on the rate of unemployment and the rate of 
increase in nominal wage rate for the United Kingdom for the period 1861-1957 
and attempted to establish a relationship. He took a simple linear equation of the 
following form:   
𝑤̇ = 𝑎 − 𝑏𝑢 
where 𝑤̇  is the rate of wage increase, a and b are constants and u is the rate of 
unemployment. Phillips found that there exists a stable and inverse relationship 
between 𝑤̇  and u, with the implication that lower rate of unemployment is 
associated with higher rate of wage increase.  
Subsequent to the publication of the results by Phillips, many economists 
followed suit and attempted similar exercises for other countries. Subsequently, it 
was established that there is a stable relationship between rising wage rate and 
rising price level. This led some economists to refine the simple equation 
estimated by Phillips and use of inflation (the rate of increase in prices) instead of 
wage rate increase. In many cases the scatter of plot of variables appeared to be a 
curve, convex to origin. As empirical studies reinforced the inverse relationship 
between the rate of inflation and the rate of unemployment the Phillips curve 
soon became an important tool of policy analysis.  
The policy implication of such a result was astounding – an economy cannot 
have both low inflation and low unemployment simultaneously. In order to 
contain unemployment an economy has to tolerate a higher rate of wage increase 
and vice versa. Thus the Phillips curve justifies the discretionary stabilization 
policy of a government. 
In Fig. 6.1 we depict a typical Phillips curve. Suppose the economy is operating 
at point A with inflation rate of 𝜋ଵ  and unemployment rate of u 1. If the 
government wants to reduce the rate of inflation to u 2, the economy has to 
tolerate a higher rate of inflation (𝜋ଶ ).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6.1: Phillips Curve 
  Inflation rate 
  A 
  B 
  Unemployment rate 
 𝜋ଶ       
     u2    u1 
  𝜋ଵ   


--- Page 5 ---
 
   83 
 
Inflation and 
Unemployment 
During the 1960s and early 1970s the Phillips curve was considered to be an 
important tool of policy analysis. The prescription was simple and straight 
forward: During periods of high unemployment the government could follow an 
expansionary monetary policy which leaves more money in the hands of people. 
Such a policy may accelerate the rate of inflation while lowering unemployment. 
Conversely, during periods of high inflation the government could follow a 
contractionary economic policy so as to reduce inflation rate; the cost of such a 
policy however was supposed to be higher rate of unemployment. Thus, 
economists believed that there was a trade-off between inflation and 
unemployment. The government could choose any combination of inflation rate 
and unemployment rate depending upon the slope and position of the Phillips 
curve.  
During the late 1970s and early 1980s, however, such a belief got shattered. The 
prescriptions of the Phillips curve did not work at all. Economies suffered from 
both high inflation and high unemployment. As unemployment increased, there 
was a lower level of output implying stagnation in economic growth. When 
governments tried to follow Keynesian policy prescription of higher government 
expenditure so as to increase aggregate demand, the rate of inflation accelerated. 
Thus, what most countries experienced was ‘stagflation’ – a combination of 
stagnation and inflation. The reason for stagflation was found to be supply shocks 
due the ‘oil crisis’ of 1973 and 1979 (refer to Unit 6). Stagflation prompted 
economists to explore further into the reasons for stagflation.  
Check Your Progress 1 
1. Write a brief note on the various types of unemployment.  
 ………………………………………………………………………………
 ………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………… 
2. Explain how the Phillips curve could offer policy options before the 
government.  
 ………………………………………………………………………………
 ………………………………………………………………………………
 ………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
 ………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………….…... 


--- Page 6 ---
 
84 
 
Expectations, Inflation 
and Unemployment 
 
3. Define the following concepts: 
a) Involuntary Unemployment 
b) Natural Rate of Unemployment 
c) Labour Force Participation Rate  
d) Inflation-Unemployment Trade-Off 
……………………………………………………………………………….
 ………………………………………………………………………………
 ………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………….
 ……………………………………………………………………………… 
6.4  NATURAL RATE OF UNEMPLOYMENT 
You might have come across the term full employment, which implies that all 
workers in the economy are employed. Have you ever thought of such a 
situation? Can it be attained? When we say that an economy is operating at ‘full 
employment’ level, we do not mean that there is zero unemployment. Because of 
imperfections in markets, rigidities in wages and prices, and various frictions in 
the economy it is not possible to obtain zero unemployment.  
For example, at any point of time, some workers are in the transition process 
from one job to another (frictional unemployment). Similarly, a fraction of 
workers cannot be employed because of mismatch between the skill they possess 
and the skill required (structural unemployment).  
In view of the above, a new concept termed ‘natural rate of unemployment’ was 
introduced in the 1960s independently by Milton Friedman and Edmund Phelps. 
Natural rate of unemployment takes into account the frictions and imperfections 
in the economy and assumes that it is natural for an economy to have certain 
fraction of its labour force unemployed, at any point of time. We observe that any 
unemployment that is not natural could be due to business cycle, or policy 
related.  
For empirical purposes natural rate of unemployment is the total of frictional 
unemployment and structural unemployment in an economy.  
It varies across countries, and over time for the same country. For the US 
economy, for example, natural rate of unemployment is estimated to be between 
3.5 per cent and 4.5 per cent. Many countries do not report any estimate of 
natural rate of unemployment.  
The concept of natural rate of unemployment reshaped macroeconomic analysis 
in subsequent years. As we will see later in this Unit, expectations of economic 
agents (such as households, firms and government) about future economic 
environment play a major role in the shape and position of the Phillips curve.  


--- Page 7 ---
 
   85 
 
Inflation and 
Unemployment 6.5  EXPECTATION-AUGMENTED PHILLIPS 
 CURVE  
The Phillips curve discussed earlier could not explain stagflation in an economy. 
For explaining stagflation we need to bring in expectations into our analysis. In 
fact, Phillips curve given in Fig. 6.1 holds true if there is no change in 
expectations in the minds of people. In case people perceive that there is a change 
in expectations, then the Phillips curve will shift. Both adaptive expectations and 
rational expectations have important implications for Phillips curve.  
6.5.1 Phillips Curve under Adaptive Expectations 
You know from microeconomics that workers and employers take decisions 
regarding employment on the basis of real wage; not nominal wage. According to 
Friedman and Phelps, expectations do matter. Thus the ‘expected real wage’ 
should be looked into account for determining equilibrium output and wage rate.  
Workers usually enter into a contract with the employer regarding their salary for 
certain time period. During contract period, salary cannot be re-negotiated; it can 
be changed only after the contract period is over. As the workers are aware of 
these conditions, they incorporate expected inflation into the contract. For 
example, if the workers expect that inflation rate would be 3 per cent in the 
coming year, they will negotiate the wage rate in such a manner that the real 
wage rate does not decline due to price increase.  
For an expected inflation rate of 𝜋ଵ  per cent, suppose the Phillips curve is given 
by SRPC 1 (see Fig. 6.2). Suppose the economy is at point A. At this point the 
expected inflation rate is 𝜋ଵ  (say 3 per cent) and unemployment rate is at the 
natural rate u* (say 6 per cent). At point A, the workers and firms expect an 
inflation rate of 3 per cent and they are getting it. Thus there is no pressure on the 
economy for a change.  
There is a possibility of trade-off between inflation and unemployment along the 
curve SRPC 1. If there is higher inflation, then real wage will decline (because 
nominal wage cannot be increased due to existing contracts). Consequently, firms 
will employ more labour thereby leading to a decline in unemployment.  
Suppose the government pursues an expansionist fiscal policy (government 
expenditure increases or tax rate decreases), which will boost aggregate demand. 
As a result, there is an increase in prices (means higher inflation rate). An 
expansionist monetary policy, such as increase in money supply or decrease in 
interest rate, will also have the same effect. It will lead to an increase in 
investment which will, to some extent, increase the demand for labour also. In 
either case, there is an increase in inflation rate to 𝜋ଶ  (say 6 per cent). The rate of 
unemployment reduces to u 2 (below the natural rate). It implies that more 
workers are employed, as a result of which output will be higher than potential 
output. In Fig. 6.2 we have shown this situation as point B. 


--- Page 8 ---
 
86 
 
Expectations, Inflation 
and Unemployment 
 
Equilibrium at point B, however, is temporary. Workers very soon realize that 
there is an unexpected increase in inflation rate. In order to compensate for the 
price rise, workers will demand a higher wage rate. It will lead to a shift in the 
Phillips curve from SRPC 1 to SRPC 2. Equilibrium in the economy will be at 
point C in Fig. 6.2. Consequently, inflation will be at 𝜋ଷ  while unemployment 
will be at the natural rate, i.e., u*. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6.2: Shift in Phillips Curve 
Notice that unemployment in the economy is back at the natural rate (6 per cent). 
The inflation rate however is much higher ( 𝜋ଷ ). Thus the attempt of the 
government to reduce unemployment rate below the natural rate inflation rate, 
results in higher and higher inflation. In view of this, the natural rate of inflation 
is often termed as the ‘non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment’ 
(NAIRU). It means that there is no acceleration in inflation if unemployment is 
maintained at this. Further, the term natural rate of unemployment indicates that 
it is inflexible, but social optimal. The term NAIRU, on the other hand, does not 
indicate any social optimality or desirability.  
When unemployment is at the natural rate or NAIRU, there will be stability in the 
rate of inflation. When unemployment departs from the natural rate, there is 
acceleration or deceleration in inflation rate. Thus if actual unemployment is less 
than u*, inflation will continue to accelerate – higher and higher in subsequent 
years. The concept of NAIRU and expectations formation explains the 
hyperinflation witnessed by many countries. Unless unemployment returns to its 
natural rate the inflation spiral will keep on accelerating.  
The above analysis brings us to an important conclusion. Under adaptive 
expectations, the short run the Phillips curve is downward-sloping. In the long 
run however, it is vertical. In Fig. 6.2, the vertical line LRPC depicts the long run 
Phillips curve. Thus there is no trade-off between inflation and unemployment in 
the long run.  
 Interest Rate 
  Unemployment Rate 
  u2   u* 
𝜋1 SRPC2 
SRPC1 
A 
B 
 C 
LRPC 
𝜋2 
𝜋3 


--- Page 9 ---
 
   87 
 
Inflation and 
Unemployment 
6.5.2 Phillips Curve under Rational Expectations 
Under rational expectations economic agents such as firms and households are 
forward looking. They take into account all available information – past 
experience as well as present and future developments in the economy. There is 
no perfect foresight under rational expectations, but the errors cancel out on the 
whole.  
An implication of the above is that actual inflation rate is equal to expected 
inflation rate. Thus workers and firms do not commit any error regarding wage 
rate during negotiations. Thus, there is no trade-off between inflation and 
unemployment under rational expectations. Unemployment rate in the economy 
is at the natural rate. 
Suppose unemployment in the economy is at the natural rate. Firms and workers 
expect inflation to be at the rate of  𝜋ଵ
௘ . Suppose, the government pursues an 
expansionary policy as a result of which there is an increase in aggregate 
demand. Consequently, there is an increase in the rate inflation. If this policy was 
expected by the economic agents, they would have factored in the increase in 
inflation rate into their decision-making. If the policy is unexpected, then it 
would have the desired effect, that is, reduction in unemployment. This brings us 
to an important issue: how effective is government policy under rational 
expectations?  If government policy is expected, it will not have any impact.  
Check Your Progress 2 
1. In 2019 the expected rate of inflation was 7 per cent while actual rate of 
inflation was 5 per cent. If ʎ = 0.5, find out the expected inflation rate for 
2020.  
 ………………………………………………………………………….……
 …………………………………………………………………………….…
 …………………………………………………………………………….…
……………………………………………………………………………….
 …………………………………………………………………………….… 
2. How do you reconcile the vertical long run Phillips curve with the 
downward sloping short run Phillips curve? Explain through a diagram.  
 ………………………………………………………………………….……
 …………………………………………………………………………….…
 …………………………………………………………………………….…
 ………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………..... 
