--- Page 11 ---
 
 
119 
Central Bank: Its Role 
in Monetary Policy 
easing. As the crisis erupted, major central banks intervened to fix the broken 
financial markets by starting quantitative easing  (QE). They committed to 
issuing liquidity by purchasing assets (including toxic) from banks and 
nonbanks, at a time when banks stopped lending to each other, households 
and firms were credit squeezed, and policy rates were running against the 
zero lower bound. When the crisis spilled over to the real sector, the objective 
of QE in some countries shifted from financial markets repair to revamping 
economic activity (“a step into the dark”, as Raghuram Rajan, former 
Governor of RBI dubbed it). In the US, UK, and Japan, QE turned at 
stimulating demand by lowering the cost of money and by raising inflation 
expectations (Bank of England 2011).  
The global financial crisis has made monetary policy the first line of defence 
to stimulate developed economies like USA through measures such as 
quantitative easing and other unconventional tools, since the policy rate was 
already zero or close to zero. It has raised the issue of redefining the role of 
central banks like never before and has led to a debate on widening the 
mandates of central banks in respect of: 
i) price stability and financial stability, 
ii) sovereign debt management,  
iii) management of capital  
iv) flows, liquidity management,  
v) communication with the public, etc.  
It has also raised the issue of governance of central banks, their independence 
and accountability. The global financial crisis also revealed the need for 
further improving the co-ordination between the central banks and the 
governments, since they have become increasingly dependent on each other 
even at an international level. In this context, the G-20 has emerged as an 
important forum so that the regulatory response is well coordinated 
internationally to ensure that the new regulatory framework is effective and 
globally implemented and the follies of the past that led to the financial crisis 
are not repeated.  
In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, financial stability has truly 
come to the centre stage. The term “financial stability” is usually interpreted 
conceptually as a persistent state of robust functioning of various financial 
system components — markets, institutions, market infrastructure —  
endowing the system to face any endogenous or exogenous financial shock 
with minimal disruptive impact. The lesson from the crisis is that financial 
stability is a necessary, though not sufficient, condition for the central bank to 
deliver on its mandate. Pre-crisis regulation focused more on stability of 
individual institutions, whereas, the crisis underscored the importance of 
focusing on systemic stability. In that context, macro-prudential policies  
refer to the use of prudential tools with the explicit objective of promoting the 


--- Page 12 ---
 
 
120 
Monetary Policy Central Bank: Its stability of the financial system as a whole, not necessarily of the individual 
institutions within it. 
After the crisis, the interest on central bank balance sheets has increased. 
During the crisis and in its aftermath, central bankers everywhere realised 
that proper communication of their policy is as important as its content. It has 
now become standard practice for central banks to indicate the policy rates, 
the rationale behind the policy action, expected outcomes and often provide 
forward guidance on their future policy actions. The growing consensus after 
the crisis is that central banks need to also guard against the development of 
financial imbalances and should not be too narrowly focused on “inflation 
targeting”. The crisis has also demonstrated the difficulties of conducting 
monetary policy in a globalised world. In India too, RBI’s communication 
has become more transparent in recent monetary policies. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) What are conventional instruments?  
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
2) What was the need for adopting unconventional instruments?  
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
3) What are the main policy tools of unconventional measures?  
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
4) Make a brief comparison of conventional and unconventional 
instruments. What is transmission mechanism?   
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
5) What issues have been raised by the global financial crisis which 
redefine the role of central banks?  
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
 


--- Page 13 ---
 
 
121 
Central Bank: Its Role 
in Monetary Policy 7.5 RBI’S MONETARY POLICY TARGET: 
INFLATION TARGETING (IT) 
Until recently, India’s central bank used to take its monetary policy decisions 
based on the multiple indicator approach. Its rate decisions were expected to 
take into account inflation, growth, employment, banking stability and the 
need for a stable exchange rate. A certain amount of target flexibility and 
balancing of conflicting objectives are unavoidable.  
Inflation targeting is a monetary policy strategy used by Central Banks for 
maintaining price level at a certain level or within a range. It indicates the 
primacy of price stability as the key objective of monetary policy. The 
argument for price stability stems from the fact that rising prices create 
uncertainties in decision making, adversely affecting savings and 
encouraging speculative investments.  On the recommendation of an Expert 
Committee under Urijit Patel , RBI abandoned the ‘ multiple indicator ’ 
approach and made inflation targeting the primary objective of its monetary 
policy. It also mooted having an MPC so that these decisions could be made 
through majority vote. Having both Government and RBI members on the 
MPC was suggested for accountability. The Government would have to keep 
its deficit under check and RBI would owe an explanation for runaway 
inflation. Monetary policy decisions by central banks can have far-reaching 
implications for the economy, investors, savers and borrowers. And if seen to 
be taken by an individual, these decisions can cause a lot of heartburn. 
Therefore, globally many governments have solved this problem by 
appointing a committee. 
India adopted an inflation target of 4 per cent with a range of +/-2 per cent for 
next five years under the monetary policy framework. The range 
accommodates data limitations, projection errors, short-run supply gaps and 
instability in agriculture production, an important factor for CPI inflation. 
Food articles account for a major weight in the indices. . When the Reserve 
Bank of India fails to meet the inflation target, it will send a report to the 
central government stating reasons and remedial actions that will be taken. A 
breach of the “tolerance level” for three consecutive quarters will constitute a 
failure of monetary policy.   
Inflation targeting (IT) is an effective monetary policy, which provides a 
better nominal anchor for monetary policy and inflation expectations. 
Inflation targeting enables the central banks to set long-run inflation 
objective. Some of the most significant empirical benefits of inflation 
targeting are:   
i) Increasing accountability and monetary policy transparency. 
ii) Taking care of time inconsistency. Time inconsistency impels the 
authorities in considering long term consequences of short-term  
actions. 


--- Page 14 ---
 
 
122 
Monetary Policy Central Bank: Its iii) IT helps in cutting down relative price variability and inflation 
expectations. 
iv) IT facilitates in predicting inflation. 
v) IT has the ability to lower the inflation - forecast errors. 
vi) IT has the ability to maintain price stability and prevent one-time 
shocks to inflation. 
Statutory backing and institutional set up for decision making : Conduct 
of Monetary Policy under IT, on June 27, 2016, the Government amended the 
RBI Act to hand over the job of monetary policy-making in India to a newly 
constituted Monetary Policy Committee (MPC). The new MPC a six-member 
panel that is expected to bring “ value and transparency ” to rate-setting 
decisions. It has three members from the RBI — the Governor, a Deputy 
Governor and another official — and three independent members to be 
selected by the Government. The MPC meets four times a year to decide on 
monetary policy by a majority vote. And if there’s a tie between the ‘Ayes’ 
and the ‘Nays’, the RBI governor gets the deciding vote.  
The MPC ensure that decisions on interest rates are made through debate by a 
panel of experts. The many-heads-are-better-than-one approach also help 
ensure that the decision isn’t easily influenced by bias or lobbying. India’s 
shift to an MPC, driven by a clear inflation-targeting framework, may ensure 
that consumers and investors can look forward to lower inflation rates over 
the long-term. There are several important lessons from the change in Indian 
inflation dynamics over the past few years: 
i) As inflation expectations stabilize, it makes sense for the RBI to look 
past sudden shock to core inflation such as the price impact of the move 
to the goods and services tax (GST). The case of food or fuel price 
shocks is more complicated, but monetary policy need not hastily 
respond to temporary price shocks, either by increasing or slashing 
interest rates.  
ii) Policy makers should be giving greater weightage to core inflation than 
before, not just in policy discussions but also in forecasting models. The 
RBI’s own inflation forecasting model — the Forecasting and Policy 
Analysis System — has parted ways with standard central bank 
forecasting models by taking a disaggregated look at food, fuel and core 
inflation. 
iii) There are two equal halves of the economy — a food sector with 
flexible prices and a non-food sector with sticky prices. Managing the 
two with a common monetary policy is a tricky job. Even the 
motivations of the people in these two sectors are different. Producers 
in the non-farm economy look ahead to make their decisions while 
producers in the farm economy look back (think of the cobweb model). 


--- Page 15 ---
 
 
123 
Central Bank: Its Role 
in Monetary Policy 
IT demands a number of pre-conditions for its successful implementation 
such as independence of central banks, well developed financial markets, 
flexible exchange rate, etc. Most emerging economies, including India, lack 
these conditions. Besides, RBI has objectives to take care of other parameters 
like economic growth, stable exchange rate and financial stability, and cannot 
restrict itself to the single objective of inflation.  
7.6 INSTRUMENTS BEING USED BY RBI FOR 
ACHIEVING THE TARGETS 
The Reserve Bank of India  (RBI) uses the monetary policy to manage 
liquidity or money supply in a manner that balances inflation and at the same 
time aids growth.  
A) Quantitative Instruments or General Tools  
The Quantitative Instruments are also known as the General Tools of 
monetary policy. These tools are related to the Quantity or Volume of the 
money. The Quantitative Tools of credit control are also called as General 
Tools for credit control. They are designed to regulate or control the total 
volume of bank credit in the economy. These tools are indirect in nature and 
are employed for influencing the quantity of credit in the country. The 
general tool of credit control comprises:    
i) Bank rate.  
ii) Repo rate.  
iii) Reverse repo rate. 
iv) Cash Reverse Ratio (CRR). 
v) Statutory liquidity Ratio (SLR).  
vi) Open Market Operations (OMO). 
B)  Qualitative Instruments or Selective Tools 
In addition to these measures, RBI also uses many qualitative tools to 
regulate credit flow and cost of credit to the economy and specific sectors 
within it. The qualitative instruments are also known as the selective tools of 
monetary policy. They are used for discriminating between different uses of 
credit. It can be discrimination favouring export over import or essential over 
non-essential credit supply. This method can have influence over the lender 
and borrower of the credit: 
i) Fixing Margin Requirements 
ii) Consumer Credit Regulation 
iii) Publicity 
iv) Credit Rationing 


--- Page 16 ---
 
 
124 
Monetary Policy Central Bank: Its v) Moral Suasion 
vi) Control Through Directives 
vii) Direct Action 
The key challenge before the monetary management in the contemporary 
context is to modulate liquidity conditions in the financial markets consistent 
not only with the macroeconomic objectives but also with the market 
outcomes. There are now an array of monetary policy instruments. The shifts 
in the monetary policy transmission channels as a result of financial 
liberalisation necessitate policy impulses through both quantum and rate 
channels. The experience of sudden switches in capital flows has emphasised 
the need for swift policy reactions with a view to balancing the domestic and 
external sources of monetisation to maintain orderly conditions in the 
financial markets ensure price stability.  As the price of the bulk of primary 
liquidity is now, more or less, market-determined, the Bank Rate now 
essentially acts as a signal of the Reserve Bank’s medium-term monetary 
policy stance.  
7.6.1 Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF)  
In June 2000, the Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) was adopted, which is 
increasingly emerging as the principal operative instrument of monetary 
policy, allows the Reserve Bank to manage market liquidity on a daily basis 
and at the same time, transmit interest rate signals to the market. The Reserve 
Bank is, thus, now able to manage liquidity through a market oriented mix of 
open market (including repo) operations reinforced by interest rate signals 
through changes in the Bank Rate and the repo rates, in addition to the 
traditional tools of changes in reserve requirements and refinance facilities. 
While the changes in the Bank Rate signal the medium-term perspective of 
the central bank, the changes in the LAF rates signal shifts in the day-to-day 
liquidity management. 
As the primary instrument of monetary policy, the LAF has to mediate 
between the several objectives of the Reserve Bank’s monetary policy. The 
quantum of absorption (injection) of liquidity and the price have to be 
determined bearing in mind not only the day-to-day liquidity position in the 
financial markets, including the foreign exchange markets but also the 
medium-term impact on price stability and growth. The multiple objectives 
pursued by the Reserve Bank along with the changes in the operating 
environment on account of technological advances pose a number of 
challenges. An important issue is the ability of the Reserve Bank to manage 
capital flows. 
Fiscal dominance continues to be the critical issue in monetary management. 
In the past, the growing fiscal deficit and its monetisation by the Reserve 
Bank of India raised important issues regarding the relative roles of fiscal 
policy and monetary policy. However, the discontinuation of quantitative 
easing of as a policy option to fund government debt and the advent of the 


--- Page 17 ---
 
 
125 
Central Bank: Its Role 
in Monetary Policy 
Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act  (FRBM) is phasing out 
monetisation of the fiscal deficit. It is, thus, necessary to emphasize that 
monetary management, however deft, and monetary-fiscal co-ordination, 
however seamless, cannot, in the ultimate sense, be a substitute for fiscal 
discipline.  
7.7 EFFECTIVENESS OF RBI’S POLICY 
INSTRUMENTS 
The use of monetary instruments in India has undergone a shift from direct to 
indirect instruments. The process has been facilitated by reforms in the 
monetary and financial system. The increasing openness of the economy and 
a market-determined exchange rate mean that the focus of policy should 
increasingly be to ensure an orderly movement in exchange and interest rates. 
There is growing evidence of a strengthening of the interest rate channel of 
the monetary transmission mechanism, which would imply that interest rates 
could be used as effective targets of monetary policy. Although the Reserve 
Bank has been relying on broad money targets as a guide for conducting 
monetary policy, the focus of short-term monetary management in recent 
times has thus been on interest rates and the exchange rate. In the light of the 
emerging dynamics a multi-indicator approach, with movements not only in 
the money supply but also in a host of economic variables being tracked for 
policy purposes. 
The objectives, instruments and mechanism of operation of monetary policy 
in India as well as elsewhere have been undergoing relentless change pari 
passu the changing structure of their respective economies.  One needs to 
judge RBI in terms of current market practices and existing milieu of the 
economy under consideration, as well as in terms of analytical foundations. 
There is widespread agreement that the record of the Reserve Bank in 
monetary management has been, on balance, satisfactory. The degree of 
credibility that the Reserve Bank has earned over timeis in itself likely to be 
an effective instrument of monetary policy in meeting the challenges of the 
future.   
Experience of inflation targeting: Flexible inflation targeting seems to have 
scored some important early victories in India. The stabilisation of inflation 
expectations as well as the growing credibility of monetary policy means that 
monetary policy need not respond frantically to every unexpected shift in 
price levels.  With the elapse of sometime, unfortunately, the results seem 
skewed towards the debit side of the ledger. RBI has consistently over-
estimated inflation. Given that at the core of IT is an estimate, or forecast, of 
inflation — a consistent overestimate of this key variable has meant that 
RBI’s interest rate stance has been biased towards the hawkish end. That has 
meant India has consistently run very high real interest rates for the major 
part of the last few years. While the impact of high real rates on private 
investment is nebulous with very little empirical evidence, it has certainly 
meant lower fiscal space for the government.  


--- Page 18 ---
 
 
126 
Monetary Policy Central Bank: Its Check Your Progress 3 
1) What targets RBI follows in its monetary policy?   
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
2) Indicate the instruments being used by RBI.  
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
3) Distinguish between quantitative and qualitative instruments of monetary 
policy.  
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
4) Discuss the effectiveness of monetary policy in achieving its objectives.  
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
7.8 LET US SUM UP  
 Over the two decades preceding the 2008 global financial crisis, a 
broad consensus had emerged that price stability – a low and 
stable inflation rate – should be the main, if not exclusive, goal of 
central banks. 
 Central banks are normally mandated to achieve certain goals 
such as price stability, high growth, low unemployment etc. But 
central banks do not directly control these variables. Rather they 
have set of instrument which they can use to achieve these 
objectives. 
 The importance assigned to targets vis-a-vis objectives in the 
design of the monetary policy strategy is particularly critical 
because a mere achievement of targets while missing the 
objective could erode the credibility of monetary policy.   
 The effectiveness of central bank policies has to be assessed in 
the context of the uncertainties against which the policies are 
implemented.  


--- Page 19 ---
 
 
127 
Central Bank: Its Role 
in Monetary Policy  The significant change is the adoption of unconventional 
monetary policies. The conventional monetary policy instrument 
is the central bank’s control of the interest rate on risk-free 
nominal bonds. Unconventional monetary policy is then deﬁned 
as a residual category: any other type of intervention by the 
central bank that does not depend for its operation on changing 
the risk-free nominal interest rate now or in the future.  
 Unconventional monetary policy instruments include balance-
sheet policies, comprising various types of quantitative easing 
and credit easing policies. Unconventional policy also includes 
emergency lending programmes and subsidized access to credit 
more generally.  
 The unconventional instruments of monetary policy also include 
newer ‘macro-prudential’ policies, which place additional 
restrictions on access to credit above and beyond the interest rate 
charged. 
 Macro-prudential measures need to be coordinated with monetary 
and fiscal policies.  
 Vulnerability to external shocks with widespread effects on the 
domestic financial system brings to the fore the usefulness of 
macro-prudential instruments.  
 It is important to keep in mind that macro-prudential policies 
should not be seen as substitutes for monetary and fiscal 
discipline – in particular, they should not be used to offset the 
harmful effects of unsustainable macroeconomic policies.      
 When India adopted IT in the second half of 2016, it was 
supposed to be a case of “ catching up with the modern Joneses ”. 
It was deemed to be a cutting-edge framework, providing 
conceptual clarity to monetary policy-making, as well as legal 
cover ensuring the independence of the RBI in conduct of the 
same.  
 The RBI and Government of India signed a Monetary Policy 
Framework Agreement on 20 th February 2015. As per terms of 
the agreement, the objective of monetary policy framework 
would be primarily to maintain price stability, while keeping in 
mind the objective of growth.  
 The monetary policy framework would be operated by the RBI. 
RBI would aim to contain consumer price inflation within 6 per 
cent by January 2016 and within 4 per cent with a band of (+/-) 2 
percent for all subsequent years. RBI has been using headline CPI 
