--- Page 1 ---
 
 
109 
Central Bank: Its Role 
in Monetary Policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Block 3 
Monetary Policy 
Unit 7  Central Bank: Its Role in Monetary Policy 
Unit 8  Central Bank: Its Role as Regulator of the  
Banking System 
Unit 9  Monetary Policy in India: Transmission  
Mechanism 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 2 ---
 
 
110 
Monetary Policy Central Bank: Its 
UNIT 7 CENTRAL BANK: ITS ROLE IN 
MONETARY POLICY    
Structure 
7.0 Objectives 
7.1 Introduction  
7.2 Targets of Monetary Policy   
7.3 Instruments of Monetary Policy  
 7.3.1 Conventional Instruments 
 7.3.2 Unconventional Instruments 
 7.3.3 Comparing Conventional and Unconventional Instruments 
 7.3.4 The Transmission Mechanism  
7.4 Global Financial Crisis and Central Banks 
7.5 RBI’s Monetary Policy Target: Inflation Targeting (IT) 
7.6 Instruments being Used by RBI for Achieving the Targets  
 7.6.1  Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF)  
7.7 Effectiveness of RBI’s Policy Instruments 
7.8 Let Us Sum Up  
7.9 Key Words 
7.10 Some Useful References  
7.11 Answers/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
7.12 Terminal Questions 
7.0  OBJECTIVES 
Having completed this unit, you will be able to: 
 explain the concept of targets to be followed by the central banks; 
 describe the various instruments of monetary policy; 
 highlight the impact of global financial crisis on central banks;    
 examine the use of unconventional instruments to tackle the 
challenges arising from financial crisis;  
 compare the conventional and unconventional instruments in 
achieving the targets; and  
 analyse the inflation targeting objective of RBI.  
 


--- Page 3 ---
 
 
111 
Central Bank: Its Role 
in Monetary Policy 7.1  INTRODUCTION 
Without doubt, money and monetary policy have evolved considerably. A 
monetary policy requires an arrangement of institutional practice to ensure 
that the right amount of money is made available to facilitate trade in an 
economy. It is no simple task to set the correct relative prices between 
various types of monies and goods and decide on how to get the right amount 
of money into circulation. Indeed, it can be argued that fiscal and monetary 
policy should run in tandem, so that in managing the latter attention is paid to 
the former and information is exchanged in the pursuit of the objectives 
jointly. It is worthwhile to recall that the nature and scope of the regulation of 
financial intermediation is closely linked to the monetary policy regime. In 
principle, there is a trade-off between designing instruments to stabilise the 
financial system and prevent excessively volatile financial outcomes, 
ensuring that financial sector retains appropriate incentives to create 
investment opportunities and allocate funds accordingly.  
The ultimate decisions in policymaking may be based on judgements and that 
could, unfortunately remain faulty, even in the presence of right information 
and foresight. This unit provides information about various aspects of targets 
and instruments of monetary policy. It also discusses inflation targeting in 
India and reviews what RBI does to set targets and use of the instruments to 
achieve them.  
7.2 TARGETS OF MONETARY POLICY  
The formal mandate of the central bank differs significantly across countries. 
De facto , though, central banks across the world appear to be increasingly 
pursuing a single nominal target. By and large, this single nominal target is 
an inflation target. It is desirable for monetary policy to target something it 
can actually hope to deliver, on an average and over time. The question 
relating to the choice of appropriate target for conducting monetary policy 
goes into the basic question of the interrelationship between money, output 
and prices. In general, most central banks have a broad mandate that includes 
not only price (or exchange rate) stability, but also the safeguarding of 
financial stability, as well as the promotion of economic growth, and, 
sometimes, financial development. The growth objective has also come to the 
forefront. To fulfil these multiple objectives within the constraints imposed 
by a particular policy regime, central banks use all available tools, including 
cooperation in some instances with fiscal authorities and other policymakers. 
Importantly, interest rates and foreign exchange intervention may not be 
sufficient to resolve the policy dilemmas resulting from the impact of 
external factors on the domestic financial system. 
There is a two-way street of monetary policy operating through financial 
markets and financial markets feeding back into monetary policy. The 
problem of central bank is compounded by the fact that their instruments do 
not directly aﬀect the goals. The instruments aﬀect variables such as money 


--- Page 4 ---
 
 
112 
Monetary Policy Central Bank: Its supply and interest rates, which then aﬀect goal variables with a lag. In 
addition, these lags may be uncertain. Due to these problems, in the conduct 
of monetary policy, a distinction is made among: 
i) goals (or objectives),  
ii) targets (or intermediate targets),  
iii) indicators (or operational targets), and  
iv) instruments (or tools). 
Target and indicator variables lie between goal and instrument variables. 
Target variables such as money supply and interest rates have direct and 
predictable impact on goal variables and can be quickly and more easily 
observed. Target variables are not directly aﬀected by central bank 
instruments. The instruments aﬀect target variables, through another set of 
variables called indicators. These indicators such as monetary base and short 
run interest rates are more responsive to instruments. 
The conduct of monetary policy can be represented schematically as follows: 
Instruments → Indicators → Targets → Goals 
Following is the list of diﬀerent kinds of variables. 
Table 7.1:  Kinds of variables 
Goals or Objectives 
i) High Employment.  
ii) Economic Growth.  
iii) Price Stability.  
iv) Interest-Rate Stability.  
v) Stability of Financial Markets.  
vi) Stability in Foreign Exchange Markets. 
Targets or Intermediate Targets 
i) Monetary Aggregates (M1, M2, M3 etc.).  
ii) Short Run and Long Run Interest Rates. 
Indicators or Operational Targets 
i) Monetary Base or High-Powered Money.  
ii) Short Run Interest Rate (Rate on Treasury Bill, Overnight Rate). 
Instruments or Tools 
i) Open Market Operations.  


--- Page 5 ---
 
 
113 
Central Bank: Its Role 
in Monetary Policy ii) Reserve Requirements.  
iii) Operating Band for Overnight Rate. 
iv) Bank Rate. 
(Source: http://web.uvic.ca/~kumara/econ506/lecture4.pdf) 
Despite listing six goals, it does not mean that diﬀerent countries and regimes 
give same weight to all these goals. Diﬀerent goals may get diﬀerent 
emphasis in diﬀerent countries and over times. All the goals may not be 
compatible with each other. For instance, goal of price stability may conﬂict 
with the goals of high employment and stability of interest rate at least in the 
short run.  
Three criteria determine how the target variables are chosen. These are: 
(i) measurability, (ii) controllability, and (iii) predictable eﬀects on goals. 
Quick and accurate measurement of target variables is necessary because the 
target will be useful only if it signals rapidly when policy is oﬀ-track. For a 
target variable to be useful, a central bank must be able to exercise eﬀective 
control over it. If the central bank cannot exercise eﬀective control over it, 
knowing that it is oﬀ-track is of little help. Finally, and most importantly, 
target variables must have a predictable impact on goal variables. If target 
variables do not have predictable impact on goal variables, the central bank 
cannot achieve its goal by using target variables. Monetary aggregates and 
short and long run interest rates satisfy all three criteria. The same three 
criteria are used to choose indicators. They must be measurable, the central 
bank should have eﬀective control over them, and they must have predictable 
eﬀect on target variables. The general conclusion is that if the main source of 
disturbance in the economy is shocks to goods market (IS curve), then 
targeting money supply (or using money supply tool) is optimal. On the other 
hand, if the main source of disturbance is shocks to demand for money or 
ﬁnancial market (LM curve), then targeting interest rate is optimal.  
Check Your Progress 1 
1) What do you mean by targets of Monetary Policy ?   
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
2) Distinguish between following elements of Monetary Policy: goals 
(objectives), intermediate targets, indicators (or operational targets), and 
instruments.  
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 


--- Page 6 ---
 
 
114 
Monetary Policy Central Bank: Its 3) What are the objectives of monetary policy?  
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
7.3 INSTRUMENTS OF MONETARY POLICY  
The lesson learnt from the global financial crisis has led central bankers to 
delve into uncharted territory adopting hitherto unheard-of unconventional 
policies. Central banks have rediscovered their role as the Lender of Last 
Resort (LoLR). The current trend worldwide and the present debate within 
the country suggests that the end of stratification between sectors and 
consolidation within sub-sectors would be inevitable. The complexity of the 
transactions and large funding requirements demand an innovative approach 
towards financial structuring and the use of a variety of financial instruments. 
However, suitable prudential norms must be in place and adhered to, for the 
process to function smoothly. Only central banks have the requisite market 
pulse and instruments to make contextual judgments.  
7.3.1 Conventional Instruments 
When a nation’s economy becomes “overheated” – growing rapidly to the 
point that inflation increases to uncomfortable levels – the central bank enacts 
restrictive monetary policy to tighten the money supply. This effectively 
reduces the amount of money in circulation and also the rate at which new 
money enters the system. Raising the target interest rate makes money more 
expensive and increases borrowing costs, reducing the demand for cash and 
cash instruments. The bank may increase the level of reserves that 
commercial and retail banks must keep on hand, limiting their ability to 
generate new loans. The central bank can also sell government bonds from its 
balance sheet in the open market, exchanging those bonds by taking in money 
from circulation. When a nation’s economy slips into recession, these policy 
tools can be operated in reverse, constituting a loose or expansionary 
monetary policy. Interest rates are lowered, reserve limits loosened, and 
instead of selling bonds in the open market, they are purchased in exchange 
for newly created money. 
7.3.2 Unconventional Instruments 
According to Deepak Mohanty  of RBI, “when central banks look 
beyond their traditional instrument of policy interest rate, monetary 
policy takes an unconventional character.” An unconventional policy 
instrument is deﬁned as any instrument of the central bank that does not 
depend for its operation on changing the risk-free nominal interest rate now 
or in the future. Unconventional monetary policy spans from quantitative 
easing to debt monetisation. In other words, the term “unconventional” 
means policy instruments other than standard tools such as interest rates or 
foreign exchange market intervention. These unconventional measures are:     


--- Page 7 ---
 
 
115 
Central Bank: Its Role 
in Monetary Policy 
i) liquidity provision to banks on extraordinary terms, especially 
at longer maturities, in order to alleviate pressures in the 
interbank market;  
ii) intervention in selected credit markets to support secondary 
market liquidity and credit pricing and supply; and  
iii) outright bond purchases aimed at easing financing conditions 
beyond what could be achieved by policy rate cuts.    
The rationale for the use of unconventional Central bank policy instruments 
is fairly straight forward. One can group these unconventional instruments 
into three broad categories:  
i) unconventional monetary policy and macro-prudential tools 
aimed at offsetting the financial implications of capital flows;  
ii) balance sheet policies other than foreign exchange intervention; 
and  
iii) fiscal and quasi-fiscal measures to offset the domestic 
consequences of foreign exchange intervention.  
Following are the main policy tools:  
i)  quantitative easing (QE);  
ii)  forward guidance;  
iii)  negative interest rates;  
iv)  overt monetary financing of fiscal deficits; and  
v)  debt monetisation.  
QE has been crucial to avert financial meltdown, and has had some effects on 
the macro-economy. Yet there are reasons to be critical about its 
effectiveness for macroeconomic stabilisation relative to its costs and risks. 
QE has dramatically increased base money, but not the money supply that 
drives aggregate demand. A major factor conditioning the macroeconomic 
effects of QE is its interaction with fiscal policy. Pulling QE alongside a 
restrictive fiscal policy is like pushing on the car’s accelerator and brake 
pedals at the same time, which is what has happened in the US and UK. 
So-called ‘helicopter money’ policies – those in which government spending 
or transfers to households are paid for by printing money – involve both 
monetary and fiscal policy. This means they require extraordinary 
cooperation between the government and the central bank, which potentially 
undermines central-bank independence. However, emergency policies of this 
type may be justified during extreme systemic crises. Injections of helicopter 
money can increase net wealth and thus stimulate spending, and this 


--- Page 8 ---
 
 
116 
Monetary Policy Central Bank: Its mechanism is particularly important when conventional monetary policy is 
stuck at the zero lower bound. 
Table 7.2 offers a snapshot of what is considered to be the main features of 
each policy type. In the table 7.2, policies are reported from left to right in 
ascending order of the directness of their impact on spending – from those 
that rely on changes in prices and expectations to those that affect spending 
by adding money balances to the economy. 
Table 7.2: Unconventional monetary policies: A synopsis 
              Policy 
Types 
Indicators 
FG 
 
NIR QE DM OMF NC 
Impact on 
aggregate demand:   
 Transmission 
channel  
 
 Effectiveness 
Indirect   
(via 
expectations 
on future 
interest  
rates)  
Short 
gestation  
Limited by 
ZLB 
Uncertain 
impact  
Indirect  
(via interest 
rates)  
 
 
 
Short 
gestation  
Poor public 
acceptance  
Strong and 
quick 
impact  
Indirect (via 
assets prices 
and inflation 
expectations)  
 
 
Short 
gestation 
Slow and 
moderate 
impact  
Indirect  (via  
regained 
fiscal space
 
 
 
 
Long 
gestation  
Quick, 
strong, and 
long lasting 
impact  
Direct  (via  
helicopter 
money 
balances) 
 
 
Long 
gestation 
Quick and 
strong 
impact  
Direct  (via  
helicopter 
money 
balances) 
 
 
Long 
gestation 
Quick and 
strong 
impact 
Central bank 
independence   
Unhindered  Unhindered  Unhindered Central bank 
/Government 
cooperation 
required  
Central bank 
/Government 
cooperation 
required  
Central 
bank not 
involved in 
complemen
tary money 
policy   
FG = forwarding guidance  
NIR = negative interest rate  
QE = quantitative easing  
DM = debt monetisation  
OMF = overt monetary financing of fiscal deficits with extreme neo-chartlist form  
NC = neo-chartalism  
(Source: https://voxeu.org/article/unconventional-monetary-policies-revisited-part-ii ) 
 


--- Page 9 ---
 
 
117 
Central Bank: Its Role 
in Monetary Policy 
The policies that have greater direct impact on spending (overt monetary 
financing, neo-chartalism) are those that combine expansionary fiscal 
impulses with permanent monetary financing (“helicopter money”). This 
combination requires a degree of cooperation between the government and 
the central bank, with implications for central-bank independence. 
Government (and political) involvement, as well as the necessary 
coordination with the central bank, entail longer policy gestation periods than 
for policies involving the central bank exclusively (forward guidance, 
negative interest rates, and QE). On the other hand, the transmission from the 
fiscal plus-monetary policy impulse to the spending response – which is 
inherent in helicopter money options – is more direct, quicker and stronger.  
Effective macro-prudential regulation and supervision is being devised to 
take care of systemic risks that lead to such financial instability. The macro-
prudential approach focuses not only on individual balance sheets but also 
interconnectedness and the network externalities that they generate. This is 
expected to take care of systemic risks. The macro prudential approach to 
regulating institutions and markets is now a key plank of central banks’ 
efforts towards maintaining financial stability. 
This includes several types of balance-sheet policies where the central bank 
purchases assets (for example through quantitative easing or credit easing), 
emergency lending, and subsidized access to central-bank credit. 
Unconventional policy as deﬁned also includes ‘macro-prudential’ policy 
instruments that place restrictions on borrowing independently of interest 
rates. 
QE injects money to owners of assets (e.g., traders, hedge funds, investors, 
banks, high wealth individuals, and speculators) who benefit from QE-stirred 
bond and asset-price rises, but represent a tiny minority with a low propensity 
to consume. Conversely, QE does not reach common people (with higher 
propensity to consume). Indications are that QE has significant distributional 
effects. 
7.3.3 Comparing Conventional and Unconventional 
Instruments   
It is important to have a good understanding of the unconventional policies 
and how they differ from the conventional ones. Overall non-conventional 
tools would seem to have some financial stability considerations. According 
to Lorenzo Bini Smaghi  (Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank) the decision whether to embark on non-conventional monetary 
policy measures, which specific ones and for how long depends on a series of 
considerations, including the overall conditions of the economy, in particular 
the presence of deflationary pressures and the effective constraint provided 
by the zero lower bound for interest rates, the structure of the financial flows 
in the economy, the medium term incentives that would be created for the 
private sector and the risks entailed in the exit strategy, including for the 
independence and credibility of the central bank. Some measures present 


--- Page 10 ---
 
 
118 
Monetary Policy Central Bank: Its greater advantages, in terms of providing the right incentives and being easily 
reversible. Others present more risks and have to be well targeted and used 
under specific circumstances.  
7.3.4 The Transmission Mechanism  
The relationship between the central bank’s instrument and the target 
variables is often referred to as the monetary policy transmission mechanism. 
In fact, this also involves a number of other economic variables and relations. 
the short-term interest rate determined by the central bank and the target 
variables (e.g. the exchange rate or inflation and the output gap) will be 
included along with other macroeconomic variables such as consumption, 
investment, government budget balance, balance of payments, long-term 
interest rate and relevant foreign variables. Influences from abroad may also 
lead to shifts in the transmission mechanism. The relationship between the 
monetary policy instrument and the targets is not invariant, and the central 
bank must therefore be ready to adjust its monetary policy if the relationship 
changes. Since fiscal policy plays an important role in the central bank’s 
ability to reach its targets, adjustment of fiscal policy may be necessary if 
monetary policy alone cannot ensure that the monetary policy targets are met. 
Dynamic transmission: If changes to the monetary policy instrument have a 
delayed effect on the monetary policy targets, the central bank’s task 
becomes considerably more difficult. When monetary policy is based on 
flexible inflation targeting, the relationship is dynamic since the target is to 
control inflation in the medium term. The central bank changes its short-term 
interest rate in order to influence inflation e.g. two years ahead. This means 
that the central bank cannot immediately assess whether an adjustment of the 
monetary policy instrument has the desired impact on its target variable. It is 
clear that the horizon for the monetary policy target is of major importance to 
the “to technique” of the central bank’s implementation of monetary policy 
and to its external communication.  
Stochastic transmission : This transmission mechanism has been described 
as a deterministic relation. In practice, however, the transmission from the 
monetary policy instrument to the targets is subject to uncertainty. When the 
central bank changes its short-term interest rate, the effect on the exchange 
rate or the future inflation is not known precisely. The importance of this 
depends on whether the relationship between the instrument and the targets is 
dynamic. The longer and more complex the transmission mechanism, the 
greater the risk that e.g. unexpected shocks to the economy prevent the 
central bank from meeting its targets. 
7.4 GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS AND CENTRAL  
BANKS  
In response to the global financial crisis central banks have embarked on a 
variety of unconventional monetary policies. Attempts were made to make 
money easier and cheaper through an increase in supply of money and credit 
