--- Page 20 ---
 
 
128 
Monetary Policy Central Bank: Its (combined) inflation as the nominal anchor for monetary policy 
stance from April 2014 onwards.   
7.9 KEY WORDS 
Chartalism :   Chartalism is a non-mainstream theory of 
money that emphasizes the impact of 
government policies and activities on the value 
of money. Chartalism states that money does not 
have intrinsic value, but is given value by the 
government. The central idea of the Chartalist 
approach is that the value of money is based on 
the power of the issuing authority and not on the 
embodied or backing precious metal. Central 
banks cannot control the money supply; rather, 
most government fiat money enters the economy 
as a result of fiscal policy. 
Conventional monetary:  During normal times, central banks use three tools  
policy tool   of monetary policy open market operations, 
discount lending, and reserve requirements to 
control the money supply and interest rates, and 
these are referred to as conventional monetary 
policy tools. 
Helicopter money :   A helicopter drop, or helicopter money, is a 
hypothetical, unconventional tool of monetary 
policy that involves printing large sums of 
money and distributing it to the public in order 
to stimulate the economy. 
Institutional background: As regards the conduct of monetary policy, the 
choice of targets, instruments and operating 
procedures was circumscribed to a large extent 
by the nature of the financial markets and the 
institutional arrangements. 
Intermediate targets : In view of the fairly stable demand function for 
money, broad money (M3) has been treated as 
an intermediate target in the conduct of 
monetary policy in India.  
Macro-prudential policy : Macro-prudential policy regime has been 
created to damp the financial cycle, and that will 
have implications for the future dynamics of the 
variables that tend to dominate the monetary 
policy debate, as well as the transmission 
mechanism of monetary policy. 


--- Page 21 ---
 
 
129 
Central Bank: Its Role 
in Monetary Policy 
Quantitative Easing :  Generally speaking, quantitative easing is really  
(QE)  just an extended open market operation 
involving the unsterilised swap of central bank 
money for privately held assets. The key 
difference is that the duration of the swap is 
both intended to be long-term and of uncertain 
length. 
Unconventional : A non - standard monetary policy or unconven-  
monetary   tional monetary policy is a tool used by a central 
policy tool  bank or other monetary authority that falls out of 
line with traditional measures, e.g. credit 
easing, quantitative easing, forward guidance, 
and signaling. 
7.10 SOME USEFUL REFERENCES  
Bossone, Biagio (2013): Unconventional monetary policies revisited (Part I), 
October 4 https://voxeu.org/article/unconventional-monetary-policies-revisited- 
part-i 
_____________, (2013): Unconventional monetary policies revisited (Part 
II), October 5  
https://voxeu.org/article/unconventional-monetary-policies-revisited-part-ii 
Jadhav, Narendra (2003): Central Bank Strategies, Credibility and 
Independence: Global Evolution and the Indian Experience, Reserve Bank of 
India, Occasional Papers Vol. 24, Nos. 1 and 2, Summer and Monsoon 2003  
Lars E. O. Svensson (2010): Monetary policy after the financial crisis, 
Second International Journal of Central Banking (IJCB) Fall Conference, 
Tokyo, September 17 https://www.bis.org/review/r100920c.pdf 
Lim, C, F Columba, A Costa, P Kongsamut, A Otani, M Saiyid, T Wezel and 
X Wu (2011): “Macroprudential policy: what instruments and how to use 
them? Lessons from country experiences”, IMF Working Paper, WP/11/238, 
International Monetary Fund, October 
Reddy, Y V (1999): Monetary Policy in India: Objectives, Instruments, 
Operating Procedures and Dilemmas (Lecture at the Fourth Securities 
Industry Summit, organised by Invest India Pvt. Ltd., at Mumbai, on May 26)  
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/Speeches/PDFs/6937.pdf 
Smaghi, Lorenzo Bini (2009): Conventional and unconventional monetary 
policy, International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies (ICMB), 
Geneva, April 28 
https://www.bis.org/review/r090429e.pdf 


--- Page 22 ---
 
 
130 
Monetary Policy Central Bank: Its Subbarao, D (2010): Post-Crisis Reforms to Banking Regulation and 
Supervision - Think Global Act Local, RBI Bulletin, October 12 
____________, (2010): Central Banks must distill Lessons from the Global 
Crisis and make Concrete Reforms, Finance and Development, IMF, June  
https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2010/06/pdf/subbarao.pdf  
7.11 ANSWERS/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR  
PROGRESS EXERCISES 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) See section 7.2 
2) See section 7.2 
3) See section 7.2 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) See Sub-section 7.3.1 
2) See Sub-section 7.3.2 
3) See Sub-section 7.3.2 
4) See Sub-section 7.3.3 
5) See Sub-section 7.3.4 
6) See Sub-section 7.4 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) See section 7.5 
2) See section 7.6 
3) See section 7.6 
4) See section 7.7 
7.12 TERMINAL QUESTIONS 
1) “For achieving the goal fiscal and monetary policy should move in 
tandem.” Explain this statement and illustrate your answer with 
examples.  
2) What is the proper objective function for monetary policy? How 
transparent should the central bank be?  
3) Should the central bank be an inflation targeter? Give arguments. How 
is this policy being implemented in India?   


--- Page 23 ---
 
 
131 
Central Bank: Its Role 
in Monetary Policy 
4) “In the choice of the target, there is always a trade-off between 
‘controllability’ of the target and the ‘attainment’ of the end objectives. 
The monetary policy mechanism holds the key in determining the 
target.” Do you agree with this statement? Give reasons for your 
answer.  
5) Examine the various instruments being used by developed countries to 
make their monetary policy effective.  
6) Explain transmission mechanism. What are its different forms? Is it 
important for the success of monetary policy?       
 
 


--- Page 24 ---
 
 
132 
Monetary Policy Central Bank: 
UNIT 8 CENTRAL BANK: ITS ROLE AS 
REGULATOR OF THE BANKING 
SYSTEM 
Structure 
8.0 Objectives 
8.1 Introduction  
8.2 The Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934  
8.3 The Banking Regulation Act, 1949  
8.4 Combating Financial Terrorism  
8.5 The Banking Ombudsman Scheme, 2006 
8.6 RBI’s Prudential Norms  
8.7 Let Us Sum Up 
8.8 Key Words 
8.9 Some Useful Links  
8.10  Answers/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
8.0 OBJECTIVES 
After going through this unit, you will be able to:  
 To identify the role and powers of the Reserve Bank of India to 
regulate the Indian banking sector under the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934 and the Banking Regulation Act, 1949;   
 To understand the RBI’s Integrated Ombudsman Scheme, 2021; 
 To identify the role of the RBI in combating financial terrorism; and  
 To examine the RBI’s prudential norms.  
8.1  INTRODUCTION 
Have you ever wondered how a country’s Central Bank can influence the 
economy and impact your everyday life? Have you ever thought how the 
Indian Banking System Regulated by the Reserve Bank of India? How can a 
single institution wield such power over the entire economy? This unit tries 
to explain this power. The Reserve Bank of India, as per the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, is authorized to inspect and regulate banks in the 
interest of the banking system, and the welfare of depositors and the public. 
The Reserve Bank of India is responsible for regulating commercial banks 
and LABs under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the Reserve Bank of 
 


--- Page 25 ---
 
 
133 
Central Bank: Its Role 
as Regulator of the 
Banking System 
India Act, 1934, and related laws. RBI’s Department of Co-operative Bank 
Regulation (DCBR) regulates State Co-operative Banks (StCBs), District 
Central Co-operative Banks (DCCBs) and Urban Cooperative Banks (UCBs). 
RBI’s main tasks include setting regulations for compliance with banking 
laws, such as licensing, branch expansion, reserve maintenance, and bank 
management. It also approves the establishment of bank subsidiaries and new 
banking activities. The Bank aims to foster a strong, diverse, and competitive 
banking system by establishing prudent regulations and staying updated on 
domestic and global developments to adapt policies accordingly. It strives to 
align regulatory standards of commercial banks with international best 
practices. To achieve its goal of establishing a world-class banking system in 
India, it maintains a flexible organizational structure with professionally 
skilled staff and adapts its activities to meet current needs.   
8.2  THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934  
The Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 is very important law which gives 
various powers to the Reserve Bank along with its obligations. The Act is 
applicable to whole of India. The following sections are noteworthy:  
Section 22: Exclusive power to issue currency notes  
The text of section 22(1) goes as follows:  
“The Bank shall have the sole right to issue bank notes in [India], and 
may, for a period which shall be fixed by the [Central Government] on 
the recommendation of the Central Board, issue currency notes of the 
Government of India supplied to it by the [Central Government], and the 
provisions of this Act applicable to bank notes shall, unless a contrary 
intention appears, apply to all currency notes of the Government of India 
issued either by the [Central Government] or by the Bank in like manner 
as if such currency notes were bank notes, and references in this Act to 
bank notes shall be construed accordingly”. 
Interpretation: As per section 22(1), the RBI has exclusive power to issue 
bank notes for a time period fixed by the Central Government on the 
recommendation of the Central Board. Apart, it will issue the currency notes 
of the Government of India (e.g., ₹ 1 note). In this regard, the students are 
advised to read the press release 1 (dated 19th March 2016) made by the RBI. 
The link of the press release is given in the footnote.  
Section 24: Demonetisation of currency notes  
The two sub-sections of section 24 go as follows:  
1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), bank notes shall be of the 
denominational values of two rupees, five rupees, ten rupees, twenty 
rupees, fifty rupees, one hundred rupees, five hundred rupees, one 
 
1https://www.rbi.org.in/commonperson/english/scripts/Press Releases. 
aspx?Id=1714 


--- Page 26 ---
 
 
134 
Monetary Policy Central Bank: thousand rupees, five thousand rupees and ten thousand rupees or of 
such other denominational values, not exceeding ten thousand rupees, 
as the Central Government may, on the recommendation of the 
Central Board, specify in this behalf.  
2) The Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Central 
Board, direct the non-issue or the discontinuance of issue of bank 
notes of such denominational values as it may specify in this behalf.  
Interpretation: As per section 24(1), the RBI can issue the bank notes of ₹ 
2, ₹ 5, ₹ 10, ₹ 20, ₹ 50, ₹ 100, ₹ 500, ₹ 1000, ₹5000, and ₹10,000 or such 
other note as specified by the Central Government on the recommendation of 
the Central Board2. However, as per section 24(2), the RBI is required to stop 
the issue of the specified bank notes on being directed by the Central 
Government. The 2016 demonisation is a recent example in this regard in 
when the bank notes of ₹ 500, ₹ 1000 were discontinued.  
Section 42: Cash reserves of scheduled banks to be kept with the RBI  
Cash Reserves Ratio: According to section 42(1), every bank (whose name 
appears in the Second Schedule of the Act) is required to maintain with the 
RBI an average daily balance 3. The amount of such balance cannot be less 
than the specified percentage (known as Cash Reserve ratio – CRR 4) of the 
total of the demand and time liabilities in India as per the returns filed by the 
bank concerned under section 42(2). In this regard, according to Direction 4 
of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) and Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR), 
Directions – 20215  
“Every bank shall maintain in India by way of cash reserve, a sum 
equivalent to such percent of the total of its Net Demand and Time 
Liabilities (NDTL) in India, in such manner and for such dates, as the 
Reserve Bank in terms of Section 42(1) of the RBI Act, 1934 and Section 
18(1) of BR Act, 1949 [including provisions of Section 18 (1) of the BR 
Act as applicable to cooperative banks], may specify, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, from time to time having regard to the needs of 
securing the monetary stability in the country”. 
There is no upper or lower limit on CRR. Till 2006, the lower and upper CRR 
limits were 3% and 20% respectively. 
Note: BR Act means the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.  
Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR)  : According to Section 42(2) of the RBI 
Act, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Reserve Bank 
 
2 Central Board means the Central Board of Directors of the Reserve Bank 
of India – Section 2 of the RBI Act, 1949.  
3 Average daily balance means the average of the balances held at the close 
of business on each day of a fortnight. Further, fortnight means the period 
from Saturday to the second following Friday, both days inclusive.  
4 As of 7th May 2024, the CRR is 4.5% (https://rbi.org.in/Home.aspx) 
5 https://m.rbi.org.in/scripts/BS_ViewMasDirections.aspx?id=12131# 


--- Page 27 ---
 
 
135 
Central Bank: Its Role 
as Regulator of the 
Banking System 
directs scheduled commercial banks to  maintain with the Bank, in addition to 
the balance prescribed by or under sub-section (1) of the RBI Act , an 
additional average daily balance the amount of which shall not be less than 
the [rate specified in the notification, such additional balance being calculated 
with reference to the excess of the total of the demand and time liabilities of 
the bank as shown in the return referred to in sub-section (2) over the total of 
its demand and time liabilities] at the close of business on the date specified 
in the notification as shown by such return so however, that the additional 
balance shall, in no case, be more than such excess. 
Consequent upon amendment to the Section 24 of the Banking Regulation 
Act,1949, effective January 23, 2007, the Reserve Bank can prescribe the 
SLR for SCBs in specified assets. The value of such assets of a SCB shall not 
be less than such percentage not exceeding 40 per cent of its total DTL in 
India as on the last Friday of the second preceding fortnight as the Reserve 
Bank may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify from time to time. 
Thus, there is no lower limit of SLR requirement, however, the upper limit is 
40 per cent. 
8.3  THE BANKING REGULATION ACT, 1949  
The Banking Regulation Act of 1949 is a significant legislation in India 
governing the operations of all banking entities within the country. Originally 
enacted as the Banking Companies Act of 1949, it became effective on 
March 16, 1949, and was later renamed as the Banking Regulation Act of 
1949 on March 1, 1966. Initially, the law was limited to regulating banking 
companies. However, in 1965, amendments were made to include 
cooperative banks and introduce other modifications. The Banking 
Regulation Act provides a comprehensive framework for the supervision and 
regulation of commercial banking in India, complementing the Companies 
Act of 1956. Notably, primary agricultural credit societies and cooperative 
land mortgage banks are exempted from its provisions. Under this Act, the 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is empowered to license banks, oversee 
shareholding and voting rights, regulate board appointments and 
management, govern bank operations, prescribe audit instructions, manage 
moratoriums, mergers, and liquidations, issue directives for public welfare 
and banking policy, and levy penalties. In 1965, the Act was amended to 
extend its coverage to cooperative banks through Section 56. These banks, 
typically operating within a single state, are established and managed by the 
respective state governments. However, RBI retains authority over licensing 
and regulation of their business activities. The Banking Act serves as a 
complementary legislation to previous banking-related acts.  
Revised Banking Regulation (Amendment) Act, 2020 is effective from 29 th 
September 20206. The amended Act encompassed 1,482 urban and 58 multi-
state cooperative banks, subjecting them to RBI oversight. Notably, the Act 
 
6 https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_PressReleaseDisplay.aspx?prid=52595  


--- Page 28 ---
 
 
136 
Monetary Policy Central Bank: empowered the RBI to undertake bank reconstructions or mergers without 
necessitating moratoriums. The following sections are noteworthy:  
Section 22(1): Licensing of Banking Companies  
As per section 22(1), no banking company can carry on its business without 
taking license from the RBI. The RBI is given the power to fix such 
conditions of license as it thinks to fit.  
Section 22 (4): Cancelling license  
According to section 22(4), the RBI reserves the power to cancel the license 
given to banking company under section 22(1). In the following 
circumstances, the RBI may cancel the license:  
a) if the company ceases to carry on banking business in India 
b) if the company at any time fails to comply with any of the conditions of 
license fixed by the RBI.  
c) if at any time, any of the conditions referred to in section 24(3), and 
section 24(3A) are not fulfilled.  
Note: If the decision of the RBI to cancel the license is not appealed to the 
Central Government, then the decision of the RBI is final.  
Section 23(1): Restrictions on opening of new, and transfer of existing, 
places of business 
According to section 23(1), without the approval of the RBI, no banking 
company can open a new place of business in India or change (except within 
the same city, town or village) the location of its business in India.  
Moreover, without the approval of the RBI, no banking company 
incorporated in India can establish a new branch outside India or relocate an 
existing one to a different location in any foreign country or area, except 
within the same city, town, or village. However, this restriction does not 
apply to the temporary opening of a branch for up to one month within the 
same locality where the banking company already operates, for events like 
exhibitions, conferences, fairs, or similar occasions, to provide banking 
services to the public.  
Section 24: Maintenance of a percentage of assets  
“A scheduled bank, in addition to the average daily balance which it is, 
or may be, required to maintain under Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 and every other banking company, in addition to the cash 
reserve which it is required to maintain under section 18, shall maintain 
in India, assets, the value of which shall not be less than such percentage 
not exceeding forty per cent, of the total of its demand and time liabilities 
in India is on the last Friday of the second preceding fortnight as the 
Reserve Bank may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify from 


--- Page 29 ---
 
 
137 
Central Bank: Its Role 
as Regulator of the 
Banking System 
time to time and such assets shall to maintained, in such form and 
manner, as may be specified in such notification”.  
Interpretation: According to section 24(1), a scheduled bank and every 
other banking company is required to maintain a certain percentage (known 
as Statutory Liquidity Ratio – SLR 7) of its assets in specified form like cash, 
gold, etc. This requirement is in addition to CRR as given section 42 of the 
RBI Act and however, these deposits are maintained by the banks themselves 
and not with the RBI. SLR cannot exceed 40 per cent. In case of inflationary 
pressure, the RBI might opt to raise SLR to diminish the credit creation 
ability of banks. 
Section 26A: Establishment of Depositor Education and Awareness Fund 
Pursuant to the amendment of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, section 
26A has been added in 2013, granting the Reserve Bank the authority to 
establish The Depositor Education and Awareness Fund (the Fund). This 
section mandates that any account in India with any bank that has not been 
operated for ten years or any unclaimed deposit for over ten years be credited 
to the Fund within three months of the ten-year period expiring. The Fund is 
intended to promote depositors’ interests and for other purposes specified by 
the RBI. Depositors can still claim their deposits or operate their accounts 
even after the ten years have passed and the funds have been transferred. The 
bank is responsible for paying the depositor and then claiming a refund from 
the Fund. 
Section 35: Inspection  
The RBI can inspect any banking company and its books and accounts at any 
time, on being directed by the Central Government. After the inspection, the 
Reserve Bank has to give the banking company a copy of its report. 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) Describe some important sections of The Reserve Bank of India Act, 
1934. 
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
2) What are the main provisions of the Banking Regulations Act, 1949?  
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
 
7 As of 7th May 2024, SLR is 18 percent.  
 
