--- Page 30 ---
 
 
138 
Monetary Policy Central Bank: 3) Do you think that the BR Act, 1949 gives immense powers to the 
Reserve Bank of India?   
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
8.4 COMBATING FINANCIAL TERRORISM  
Combating financial terrorism (CFT) refers to the efforts made by the 
Reserve Bank, along with other regulatory bodies and law enforcement 
agencies, to prevent and disrupt the flow of funds used to support terrorist 
activities. The Reserve Bank implements various measures to detect and deter 
financial transactions that may be linked to terrorism. In this regard, the RBI 
has issued Master Circular 8 — Know Your Customer norms / Anti-Money 
Laundering Standards/ Combating of Financing of Terrorism /Obligation of 
banks under PMLA, 2002. Students are advised to read this master circular to 
enhance their knowledge. The circular starts with its purpose paragraph 
which goes as follows:  
“Banks and financial institutions (FIs) have been advised to follow 
certain customer identification procedure for opening of accounts and 
monitor transactions of suspicious nature for the purpose of reporting 
the same to appropriate authority. These ‘Know Your Customer’ (KYC) 
guidelines have been revisited in the context of the recommendations 
made by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) on Anti Money 
Laundering (AML) standards and on Combating Financing of Terrorism 
(CFT). Detailed guidelines based on the recommendations of FATF and 
the paper issued on Customer Due Diligence (CDD) for banks by the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), with suggestions 
wherever considered necessary, have been issued. Banks/FIs have been 
advised to ensure that a proper policy framework on ‘Know Your 
Customer’ and Anti-Money Laundering measures is formulated and put 
in place with the approval of their Boards”. 
8.5 THE BANKING OMBUDSMAN SCHEME, 2006 
An ombudsman is an independent official appointed to investigate complaints 
against organizations on behalf of individuals who believe they have been 
treated unfairly or improperly. Ombudsmen are typically impartial and 
objective, tasked with resolving disputes and ensuring that the rights of 
individuals are upheld according to the law or relevant regulations. They 
often have the authority to investigate complaints, mediate between parties, 
make recommendations for resolving issues, and sometimes enforce 
corrective actions or remedies. Ombudsmen serve as a recourse for 
 
8 https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_ViewMasCirculardetails.aspx?id=9848  


--- Page 31 ---
 
 
139 
Central Bank: Its Role 
as Regulator of the 
Banking System 
individuals who have exhausted other avenues for resolving their grievances 
and seek an impartial resolution. 
To resolve the complaints of the customers of various banks, the RBI has 
launched the Banking Ombudsman Scheme, 2006 9 (amended scheme is 
effective from July 1, 2017). The Banking Ombudsman Scheme is an 
expeditious and inexpensive forum for bank customers for resolution of 
complaints relating to certain services rendered by banks. The Banking 
Ombudsman is a senior official appointed by the Reserve Bank of India to 
redress customer complaints against deficiency in certain banking services 
covered under the grounds of complaint specified under Clause 8 of the 
Banking Ombudsman Scheme 2006 (As amended upto July 1, 2017). 
Currently, twenty Banking Ombudsmen have been designated, and their 
offices are primarily situated in state capitals. The addresses and contact 
information for these Banking Ombudsman offices are available in Annex I 
of the Scheme. The scheme covers all scheduled commercial banks, regional 
rural banks and scheduled primary co-operative banks. If a bank fails to 
respond within one month of receiving a complaint, rejects the complaint, or 
if the complainant is unsatisfied with the bank’s response, they can lodge a 
complaint with the Banking Ombudsman. According to point 8 of the 
schemes, the grounds of the complaints are as follows:  
1) Non-payment or inordinate delay in the payment or collection of 
cheques, drafts, bills etc.; 
2) Non-acceptance, without sufficient cause, of small denomination notes 
tendered for any purpose, and for charging of commission in respect 
thereof; 
3) Non-acceptance, without sufficient cause, of coins tendered and for 
charging of commission in respect thereof; 
4) Non-payment or delay in payment of inward remittances; 
5) Failure to issue or delay in issue of drafts, pay orders or bankers 
cheques; 
6) Non-adherence to prescribed working hours; 
7) Failure to provide or delay in providing a banking facility (other than 
loans and advances) promised in writing by a bank or its direct selling 
agents; 
8) Delays, non-credit of proceeds to parties’ accounts, non-payment of 
deposit or non-observance of the Reserve Bank directives, if any, 
applicable to rate of interest on deposits in any savings, current or other 
account maintained with a bank; 
 
9 https://rbikehtahai.rbi.org.in/resolve-complaints-faq.html 


--- Page 32 ---
 
 
140 
Monetary Policy Central Bank: 9) Complaints from Non-Resident Indians having accounts in India in 
relation to their remittances from abroad, deposits and other bank 
related matters; 
10) Refusal to open deposit accounts without any valid reason for refusal; 
11) Levying of charges without adequate prior notice to the customer; 
12) Non-adherence to the instructions of Reserve Bank on ATM / Debit 
Card and Prepaid Card operations in India by the bank or its 
subsidiaries; 
13) Non-adherence by the bank or its subsidiaries to the instructions of 
Reserve Bank on credit card operations; 
14) Non-adherence to the instructions of Reserve Bank with regard to 
Mobile Banking / Electronic Banking service in India by the bank; 
15) Non-disbursement or delay in disbursement of pension (to the extent 
the grievance can be attributed to the action on the part of the bank 
concerned, but not with regard to its employees); 
16) Refusal to accept or delay in accepting payment towards taxes, as 
required by Reserve Bank/Government; 
17) Refusal to issue or delay in issuing, or failure to service or delay in 
servicing or redemption of Government securities; 
18) Forced closure of deposit accounts without due notice or without 
sufficient reason; 
19) Refusal to close or delay in closing the accounts; 
20) Non-adherence to the fair practices codes as adopted by the bank; 
21) Non-adherence to the provisions of the Code of Bank’s Commitments 
to Customers issued by Banking Codes and Standards Board of India 
and as adopted by the bank; 
22) Non-observance of Reserve Bank guidelines on engagement of 
recovery agents by banks; 
23) Non-adherence to Reserve Bank guidelines on para-banking activities 
like sale of insurance / mutual fund /other third-party investment 
products by banks; 
24) Non-adherence to Reserve Bank guidelines on para-banking activities 
like sale of insurance / mutual fund /other third-party investment 
products by banks; 
25) Any other matter relating to the violation of the directives issued by the 
Reserve Bank in relation to banking or other services. 


--- Page 33 ---
 
 
141 
Central Bank: Its Role 
as Regulator of the 
Banking System 
26) Any other matter relating to the violation of the directives issued by the 
Reserve Bank in relation to banking or other services. 
Customers can also file complaints regarding inadequacies in service 
concerning loans and advances:  
1. Non-observance of Reserve Bank Directives on interest rates; 
2. Delays in sanction, disbursement or non-observance of prescribed time 
schedule for disposal of loan applications; 
3. Non-acceptance of application for loans without furnishing valid 
reasons to the applicant; and 
4. Non-adherence to the provisions of the fair practices code for lenders as 
adopted by the bank or Code of Bank’s Commitment to Customers, as 
the case may be; 
5. Non-observance of any other direction or instruction of the Reserve 
Bank as may be specified by the Reserve Bank for this purpose from 
time to time. 
6. The Banking Ombudsman may also deal with such other matter as may 
be specified by the Reserve Bank from time to time. 
 Source: https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/Content/PDFs/BOS2006_2302017.pdf 
The Reserve Bank - Integrated Ombudsman Scheme, 2021 
The Reserve Bank - Integrated Ombudsman Scheme, 2021 (the Scheme) was 
launched on November 12, 2021. The Scheme integrates the existing three 
Ombudsman schemes of RBI namely,  
1) The Banking Ombudsman Scheme, 2006;  
2) The Ombudsman Scheme for Non-Banking Financial Companies, 2018; 
and  
3) The ombudsman scheme for digital transactions, 2019.  
The Scheme, framed by the Reserve Bank in exercise of the powers conferred 
on it under Section 35A of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), 
Section 45L of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), and Section 
18 of the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 (51 of 2007), will 
provide cost-free redress of customer complaints involving deficiency in 
services rendered by entities regulated by RBI, if not resolved to the 
satisfaction of the customers or not replied within a period of 30 days by the 
regulated entity. 
In addition to integrating the three existing schemes, the Scheme also 
includes under its ambit, Non-Scheduled Primary Co-operative Banks with a 
deposit size of ₹50 crore and above. The Scheme adopts ‘One Nation One 
Ombudsman’ approach by making the RBI Ombudsman mechanism 
jurisdiction neutral. 


--- Page 34 ---
 
 
142 
Monetary Policy Central Bank: Some of the salient features of the Scheme are: 
1) It will no longer be necessary for a complainant to identify under which 
scheme he/she should file complaint with the Ombudsman. 
2) The Scheme defines ‘deficiency in service’  as the ground for filing a 
complaint, with a specified list of exclusions. Therefore, the complaints 
would no longer be rejected simply on account of “not covered under the 
grounds listed in the scheme”. 
3) The Scheme has done away with the jurisdiction of each ombudsman 
office. 
4) A Centralised Receipt and Processing Centre has been set up at RBI, 
Chandigarh for receipt and initial processing of physical and email 
complaints in any language. 
5) The responsibility of representing the Regulated Entity and furnishing 
information in respect of complaints filed by customers against the 
Regulated Entity would be that of the Principal Nodal Officer in the rank 
of a General Manager in a Public Sector Bank or equivalent. 
6) The Regulated Entity will not have the right to appeal in cases where an 
Award is issued by the ombudsman against it for not furnishing 
satisfactory and timely information/documents. 
The Executive Director-in charge of Consumer Education and Protection 
Department of RBI is the Appellate Authority  under the Integrated 
Ombudsman Scheme. 
8.6 RBI’S PRUDENTIAL NORMS  
The RBI, following recommendations from the Committee on Financial 
System led by Chairman Shri M. Narasimham has implemented gradual 
changes to ensure that banks accurately depict their financial status in their 
balance sheets. These changes involve introducing prudential norms for 
income recognition, asset classification, and provisioning for advances across 
banks. In this regard, the RBI issued a revised master circular 10 - Income 
Recognition, Asset Classification, Provisioning and Other Related 
Matters – UCBs (dated 2 nd April 2024) . The students are advised to go 
through the circular available on the official website of the RBI, however, 
some of the most prominent points are discussed here briefly.  
1) Asset Classification  
Banks should classify their assets into the following broad groups:  
a) Standard assets: A standard asset refers to a loan or financial asset 
that doesn’t exhibit any signs of problems and doesn’t pose more 
than the normal level of risk associated with the business. In other 
 
10https://www.rbi.org.in/scripts/BS_ViewMasCirculardetails.aspx?id=1265
8#1 


--- Page 35 ---
 
 
143 
Central Bank: Its Role 
as Regulator of the 
Banking System 
words, it is an asset that is considered healthy and is not classified as 
a Non-Performing Asset (NPA), indicating that it is being serviced 
as per the agreed terms and doesn’t raise concerns about repayment.  
b) Sub-standard assets: An asset falls into this category if it has been 
classified as a Non-Performing Asset (NPA) for a period up to 12 
months. In such cases, the current financial standing of the 
borrowers/guarantors or the current market value of the collateral 
pledged is insufficient to ensure full recovery of the owed amount by 
the banks. Essentially, assets classified as sub-standard exhibit clear 
credit weaknesses that hinder the repayment of the debt. There is a 
notable risk that banks may incur losses if these deficiencies are not 
rectified. 
c) Doubtful assets:  An asset is categorized as doubtful if it has been 
classified as a Non-Performing Asset (NPA) for over 12 months. A 
loan classified as doubtful shares all the weaknesses found in sub-
standard assets. However, it also carries the additional characteristic 
that these weaknesses render the full collection or liquidation highly 
questionable and improbable based on current known facts, 
conditions, and values. In essence, doubtful assets pose significant 
challenges for recovery or liquidation, making their future outcomes 
uncertain. 
d) Loss assets :  A loss asset is one where loss has been identified by 
the bank or internal or external auditors or by the Co-operation 
Department or by the RBI’s inspection, but the amount has not been 
written off, whether completely or partly. In other words, such an 
asset is considered un-collectible and of such little value that its 
continuance as a bankable asset is not warranted although there may 
be some salvage or recovery value. 
2) Non-performing assets (NPAs)  
Assets are classified as non-performing assets if:  
a) In case of a term loan, the interest or principal instalment is overdue 
for more than 90 days.  
b) The account remains ‘out of order’, in respect of an Overdraft / Cash 
Credit (OD/CC) and all other loan products being offered as an 
overdraft facility, including those not meant for business purposes 
and/or which entail interest repayments as the only credits. 
c) The bill remains overdue for a period of more than 90 days in the 
case of bills purchased and discounted. 
d) In the case of direct agricultural advances as listed in Annex 1 (of 
the circular), the overdue norm specified at para 2.1.3 (of the 
circular) would be applicable. In respect of agricultural loans other 
than those specified in Annex 1, identification of NPAs would be 
done on the same basis as non-agricultural advances. 


--- Page 36 ---
 
 
144 
Monetary Policy Central Bank: e) Any amount to be received remains overdue for a period of more 
than 90 days in respect of other accounts. 
f) In addition, an account may also be classified as NPA in terms of 
certain specific provisions of this Master Circular, including inter 
alia paragraphs 2.2.7 and clarifications provided under the 
frequently asked questions (FAQs) in Annex-4 of the document: 
(https://www.rbi.org.in/scripts/BS_ViewMasCirculardetails.aspx?id
=12658#1. 
3) Income Recognition  
a) The policy of income recognition has to be objective and based on 
the record of recovery. Income from non-performing assets (NPA) is 
not recognised on accrual basis but is booked as income only when 
it is actually received. Therefore, banks should not take interest on 
non-performing assets to their income account on accrual basis. 
b) However, interest on advances against term deposits, NSCs, KVPs 
and life insurance policies may be taken to income account on the 
due date, provided adequate margin is available in the accounts. 
c) Fees and commissions earned by the banks as a result of re-
negotiations or rescheduling of outstanding debts should be 
recognised on an accrual basis over the period of time covered by 
the re-negotiated or rescheduled extension of credit. 
d) If Government guaranteed advances remain ‘overdue’ for more than 
90 days, the interest on such advances should not be taken to income 
account unless the interest has been realised. This shall be applicable 
in cases of both Central and State Government guaranteed accounts. 
e) In cases of loans where moratorium has been granted for repayment 
of interest, banks may recognize interest income on accrual basis for 
accounts which continue to be classified as ‘standard’.  
f) As a prudent practice and in order to bring about uniform accounting 
practice among banks for booking of income on units of UTI and 
equity of All India Financial Institutions, such income should be 
booked on cash basis and not on accrual basis. 
g) In respect of income from Government securities or bonds of public 
sector undertakings and All India Financial Institutions, where 
interest rates on the instruments are predetermined, income may be 
booked on accrual basis, provided interest is serviced regularly and 
is not in arrears. 
h) Interest realised on NPAs may be taken to income account, provided 
the credits in the accounts towards interest are not out of fresh / 
additional credit facilities sanctioned to the borrower concerned. 


--- Page 37 ---
 
 
145 
Central Bank: Its Role 
as Regulator of the 
Banking System 
4) Provisioning norms  
Provisioning depends upon the type of the asset i.e.,  
i)  Loss Assets 
The entire assets should be written off after obtaining necessary approval 
from the competent authority and as per the provisions of the Co-
operative Societies Act / Rules. If the assets are permitted to remain in 
the books for any reason, 100 per cent of the outstanding should be 
provided for. 
ii)  Doubtful Assets 
a) Provision should be 100 per cent of the extent to which the 
advance is not covered by the realisable value of the security to 
which the bank has a valid recourse. The realisable value should 
be estimated on a realistic basis. 
b) In regard to the secured portion, provision may be made on the 
following basis, at the rates ranging from 20 per cent to 100 per 
cent of the secured portion depending upon the period for which 
the asset has remained doubtful: 
Period for which the advance has 
remained in ‘doubtful’ category 
Provision 
requirement  
Upto 1 year  20% 
1 to 3 years  30% 
Advances classified as doubtful for more 
than 3 years on or after April 1, 2010 
100% 
  
 
iii)  Sub-standard assets  
A general provision of 10 per cent on total outstanding should be 
made without making any allowance for ECGC guarantee cover and 
securities available. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) What do you understand by combating financial terrorism (CFT)? 
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 


--- Page 38 ---
 
 
146 
Monetary Policy Central Bank: 2) Define the non-performing assets (NPAs) as defined by the RBI. 
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
3) Briefly describe the Banking Ombudsman Scheme, 2006 
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
8.7 LET US SUM UP  
The unit elucidates the pivotal role of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) as 
outlined in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and the Banking Regulations 
Act, 1949. The RBI Act delineates the various powers conferred upon the 
RBI, such as the authority to issue banknotes/currency and determine the 
Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) to regulate the financial system effectively. 
Additionally, the unit underscores the significance of the Banking 
Regulations Act of 1949, which empowers the RBI to enforce regulations 
governing aspects like determination of the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR), 
inspection procedures, licensing, license cancellation, etc. Furthermore, the 
text delves into the critical role of the RBI in combating financial terrorism, 
highlighting its efforts in safeguarding the stability and integrity of the 
financial system. It elaborates on the Banking Ombudsman Scheme of 2006, 
designed to address grievances and ensure fair practices within the banking 
industry. Lastly, the unit discusses the RBI’s norms for asset classification, 
income categorization, and other relevant financial parameters, emphasizing 
its role in maintaining transparency and accountability within the banking 
sector. 
8.8 KEY WORDS 
Combating Financial  : 
Terrorism 
Combating financial terrorism involves efforts 
by regulatory authorities and financial 
institutions to prevent, detect, and mitigate 
activities that fund or facilitate terrorist 
organizations or activities.  
CRR (Cash Reserve  : 
Ratio) 
The Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) is the percentage 
of a bank’s total deposits that it is required to 
maintain as reserves with the Central Bank (in 
India, the Reserve Bank of India). 
Money Laundering      : It involves a series of complex financial 
transactions aimed at concealing the illicit source 


--- Page 39 ---
 
 
147 
Central Bank: Its Role 
as Regulator of the 
Banking System 
of money, typically through layers of 
transactions and financial instruments, to 
integrate the “dirty” money into the legal 
financial system. 
Non-Performing          : 
Assets (NPAs) 
NPAs refer to loans or advances extended by 
banks and financial institutions that have ceased 
to generate income for the lender. An asset 
becomes non-performing when the borrower 
fails to make interest or principal payments for a 
specified period, typically 90 days or more. 
RBI’s Ombudsman     : 
Scheme 2006 
The Reserve Bank of India's Ombudsman 
Scheme, 2006, is a mechanism established by the 
RBI to address and resolve grievances and 
complaints of customers against banks and other 
financial institutions regulated by the RBI. 
SLR (Statutory          : 
Liquidity Ratio) 
 SLR is the percentage of a bank’s Net Demand 
and Time Liabilities (NDTL) that it is mandated 
to maintain in the form of liquid assets such as 
cash, gold, or government-approved securities.  
The Banking               : 
Regulation Act, 1949 
The Banking Regulation Act, 1949, is an Indian 
legislation that governs the functioning and 
operations of banks in India. It empowers the 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to regulate the 
banking sector. 
The Reserve Bank of  : 
India Act, 1934 
The Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, is an 
important legislation that provides the legal 
framework for the establishment, powers, and 
functioning of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI).  
8.9 SOME USEFUL REFERENCES   
1) https://www.rbi.org.in/commonman/english/Scripts/speeches.aspx?Id= 
3161 
2) https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/Publications/PDFs/RBIA1934170510. 
PDF 
3) https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_PressReleaseDisplay.aspx?prid= 
52595 
4) https://www.rbi.org.in/scripts/BS_ViewMasCirculardetails.aspx?id= 
12658#1 
5) https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/Content/PDFs/BOS2006_2302017.pdf 
6) https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_ViewMasCirculardetails.aspx?id= 
9848 


--- Page 40 ---
 
 
148 
Monetary Policy Central Bank: 8.10 ANSWERS/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES 
Check Your Progress 1  
1) Section 22: Exclusive power to issue currency notes, Section 24: 
Demonetisation of currency notes, Section 42: Cash reserves of 
scheduled banks to be kept with the RBI.    
2) Section 22(1): Licensing of Banking Companies, Section 22 (4): 
Cancelling license, Section 23(1): Restrictions on opening of new, and 
transfer of existing, places of business, Section 24: Maintenance of a 
percentage of assets, Section 26A.  
3) Banking Regulation (Amendment) Act, 2020 empowered the RBI to 
undertake bank reconstructions or mergers without necessitating 
moratoriums. Sections like Section 22(1), Section 22(4), Section 23(1), 
Section 24, Section 35 have given a lot of power to RBI. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) CFT refers to the efforts made by the Reserve Bank, along with other 
regulatory bodies and law enforcement agencies, to prevent and disrupt 
the flow of funds used to support terrorist activities. The Reserve Bank 
implements various measures to detect and deter financial transactions 
that may be linked to terrorism. 
2) Assets are classified as non-performing assets if: the interest or principal 
instalment, bill is overdue for more than 90 days, the account remains 
‘out of order’, in respect of an Overdraft / Cash Credit (OD/CC).   
3) The Banking Ombudsman Scheme is an expeditious and inexpensive 
forum for bank customers for resolution of complaints relating to certain 
services rendered by banks. The Banking Ombudsman is a senior official 
appointed by the Reserve Bank of India to redress customer complaints 
against deficiency in certain banking services.   
