--- Page 4 ---
140
Development Strategies
 identify different forms/instruments of State intervention;
delineate the neoclassical rationale for State intervention in Market for
efficiency;
discuss the rationale for State intervention in Market for equity;
explain State intervention mandated in the Constitution of India; and
distinguish between intervention and interference.
6.1 INTRODUCTION
Political economy as evolved in the last few centuries in the West, dealt with the
role of State in relation to economic affairs– both of public nature and private
nature. As managing the State paraphernalia and making it help run the economy
needed resources, fiscal operations of finding ways of mobilising resources and
expending them had been an important aspect of a State’s economic activities.
With evolving complexities, monetary operations were generally parted from
treasury functions of the government and entrusted with an independent and
specialised agency, mostly within government domain and invariably under a
separate law.
Societies and countries could progress because there were in existence certain
institutions, which evolved over time practically in all civilised societies with
variations and at differing pace. A legal framework ensuring existence of private
property, an inheritance system for some assets and protection of contractual
obligations has been a ubiquitous feature. It was realised quite early that many
of resources are consumed in common and there had to be institutions to resolve
issues should they arise in possession or use of such resources. In State-led
societies, this task was given to or assumed by the State. State intervened in the
economy for improving efficiency, enhancing equity, stabilising its activity level
and balancing tradeoffs when they arose.
In the context of development, the expressed aspiration of post-war liberating
colonies, led State in many newly independent countries to assume direct charge
of running certain industries, besides educational and health facilities, regulating
several others to seek efficiency and/or equity and promoting still others like
financial institutions. In part, this was a reflection of the apparent success of the
planning apparatus in the erstwhile USSR. But the USSR broke up and the
constituents pursued market-oriented policies– known as perestroika (reforms)
and glasnost (open-ness).
Relationship between State and Market across space and time has not been the
same. So-called capitalism where quality and quantity of state invention distinctly
differed from so-called socialism but both existed side by side for pretty long
time. When most countries allowed market better, individual countries and regions
differed not necessarily in proportion to the level of development. Over time, it
appears that market dominated state and sought state to be a facilitator rather
than a competitor by devising such formal institutions and designing them in
such a way that market flourish and help the country grow. However, when crises
struck such as the Great Depression of 1930s, the Great Recession of 2008-09 or
Covid-19, the market operators sought the help from the State. In other times,
either market sought or state sought the partnership between private sector and
public sector in many development arenas which were traditionally taken up in


--- Page 5 ---
141
State and Market: Indian
Context
public sector for a pretty long time. This partnership had to be in terms of sharing
of resources, risk and revenue. Anyway, there have been swings in the relationship
between the two, market and state, in terms of domination, competition and
cooperation. However, the unit, given the limitation of space, would not devote
much time on this aspect.
The focus of this unit is on State intervention in individual markets for improving
both the efficiency and equity of outcomes.  In addition, State plays paternal role
of encouraging or discouraging consumption of certain goods. It also chooses to
regulate as well as promote quite a few private activities, including those of
economic nature. The unit devotes space to discuss the nature of State and market,
the rationale of State intervention in market for efficiency and equity. It also
discusses State intervention in the context of India.
6.2 STATE AND MARKET
State and market are two great institutions which humans have evolved over
time, among several others, to resolve inter-personal or inter-group issues in
people’s life that arise from living together. Both are overarching in their scope.
Broadly speaking, one is political and the other is economic; but they also seek
to intervene in each other’s sphere.
State supposedly evolved to perform watch and ward functions, to defend the
society from external aggression and internal disturbances while market evolved
to benefit from voluntary exchange of goods (and services) which was greatly
facilitated with the invention of money as medium of exchange.
However, State has often been intervening in, some would argue even meddling
in, the economic spheres of life. Justifications varies from time to time, giving
impression that State and market are hand in glove. Property rights and inheritance
laws as well as people’s entitlements and obligations, which were traditionally
evolved have been recognised by the State which either accorded sanction or
tweaked them a little here and there. Nevertheless, formal state institutions always
alongside informal societal institutions where institutions mean the rules of
conduct for individuals and other entities to avoid conflicts should they arise.
Generally, there is a tendency for State to assume greater scope by formalising
institutions and occasions arise for them.
6.2.1 State and Government
It would be pertinent to point out basic difference between State and government
though they may be used interchangeably. State has four essential elements of
population, territory, sovereignty, and government. In fact, government works
for the State as its agent. People are a collectivity of individuals connected
intractably. Territory belongs to the State over which it has sovereignty and
jurisdiction; and government is supposed to preserve, protect and defend that
territory. While State is sovereign, the government is not. In a democracy, it is
often asserted that people are sovereign as they choose the State, rather the
government, they would like to be governed by.
Government keeps coming and going as per rules of the State– best codified in
the Constitution. While State may appear to be abstract, it is which asserts
sovereignty of a community of people. All individuals living in the territory,


--- Page 6 ---
142
Development Strategies except those belonging to foreign States, are members of the State as its citizens.
In India, there are 130 crore people, with 99.5 per cent being the citizens. While
a few Indian citizens may be non-resident, few foreign citizens may be residents
in India. In contrast, government is concrete, visible, and active, and involves a
subset of people– some as representatives of people and some as employees in
their service. For example, in India, there are around 545 MPs in the House of
People, over 4000 MLAs in Stare Assemblies and over 30 lakh members in
Panchayats and Municipalities, who are direct representatives of the people at
some level of government.
Further, the form of government may vary from State to State. Government may
be monarchial, aristocratic, dictatorship or democracy. It may have a presidential
form or parliamentary one. It may be federal– with several fixed or flexible
constituents, or unitary with centralised or decentralised administrative set-up.
If federal, it may have several levels or tiers of governments. State exists
independently of the form of government while people may choose the form of
government.
However, the word State may have several meanings in popular usage. For
example, in the Constitution of India, India is a State as well as a Union of
States. (So is the case of the US.) Modern government normally has three wings,
legislature, executive and judiciary. But the Constitution of India, for legal
purposes, defines the State in Art 12, in relation to Fundamental Rights which
must be adjudicated by Judiciary, as:
… “the State” includes the Government and Parliament of India and the
Government and Legislature of each of the States and all local or other authorities
within the territory of India or under the Government of India.
Finally, in the context of intervention, phrases State intervention and government
intervention mean one and the same thing. When, however, it comes to failure,
the phrase used is government failure– not State failure.
6.2.2 Market: Meaning and Forms
It seems, at some point in antiquity, quite possibly in different periods in different
places, humans realised that voluntary exchange between two humans might
lead to specialisation– thus to division of labour, and thereby raising production
levels and thus bettering the possessions of both the exchangers. The same holds
in inter-societal exchanges which might have been rare in the days when a society
could still raid on other societies to improve upon its possessions. Once, a society
is able to produce enough to maintain a regular army, it evolved as a State to
defend itself against other societies. Rules for conduct of human affairs within a
society had to be framed. Instruments might have had to be devised. For example,
money is an instrument to facilitate exchange or transactions in market.
Size of market depends on the level of specialisation and division of labour, said
Adam Smith. He is in fact referring to the size of economy in today’s parlance,
which is generally measured in terms of Gross Value Added (GV A). Another
connotation, as in microeconomics, is a market for a commodity– good or service,
or for a factor. Still another connotation is regular market referring to market
place or periodic market referring to frequency. Nowadays, it may be real or
virtual!
