--- Page 22 ---
158
Development Strategies consumption is discouraged, are known as demerit
goods.
Externality : Uncompensated  effect of an activity on a third party
who may neither be a producer nor a consumer of the
activity.
Intervention : An action intentionally carried out to sustain an activity
or resolve an issue between two parties engaged in an
activity.
Market : An arrangement, actual or virtual, facilitating voluntary
exchange between two parties.
Market Power : Ability of a firm (or a group of firms) to dictate prices
or quantity of goods and services i.e. keep prices above
or quantities below the level that would have prevailed
under competition.
Merit Goods : Goods that are seen as being useful to consumers, but
may not be appreciative and their consumption is
generally encouraged by society or government.
Ownership : A bundle of rights over a real, financial, or intellectual
property, which can be separated and held by different
parties.
Private Goods : Goods that are rival in consumption and consumers can
be excluded with ease are called private goods.
Public Goods : Goods that are non-rival in consumption and consumers
cannot be excluded altogether are public goods.
Regulation : A directive, law, or rule maintained by an authority to
control an activity or process.
State : A human institution of organised political community
or body politic.
6.11 REFERENCES
Books on Microeconomics, Public Finance, and Environmental Economics which
include relevant chapters, would be good enough for the Unit. www.britannia.com
and www.tutor2u.net could be websites among those which can be consulted.
Constitution of India contains reasons for intervention in market in Part IV and
Part XI– particularly Chapter I. For swings in the relative importance between
market and State and changing complexion of the relationship between the World
Development Reports of 1996 and 1997 would be an interesting read. However,
one can profitably read following books/articles for advanced understanding:
1) Francis M. Bator (1958). The Anatomy of Market Failure, Quarterly Journal
of Economics, V ol. 72, No.2. Available on internet.
2) Bernard Salonie (2000). Microeconomics of Market Failure, The MIT Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.


--- Page 23 ---
159
State and Market: Indian
Context
3) Gordon Tullock et al. (2002). Government Failure: A Primer in Public Choice,
Cato Institute, Washington.
4) Clifford Winston (2006). Government Failure versus Market Failure:
Microeconomics Policy Research and Government Performance, AEI-
Brookings Joint Centre for Regulatory Studies, Washington.
6.12 ANSWERS OR HINTS TO CHECK YOUR
PROGRESS EXERCISES
Check Your Progress 1
1) Government is only one component of State, other being People, Territory,
and Sovereignty.
2) State word is also used for the constituent units of a State as it has practically
all elements of State as defined in Political Science, the difference in some
contexts being that ‘sovereignty’ being replaced by ‘autonomy’ in their
designated spheres. States may be clubbed with Union Territories in certain
references in India.
3) Market may mean the whole economy or its size, generally measured in
terms of GV A. It may have broad types such as goods market, labour market,
etc. But then, it has microeconomic connotation of market for a particular
good.
4) Existence of private property or still better alienable property and laws of
inheritance.
Check Your Progress 2
1) Production, provision, promotion, protection, restriction (on price, quantum
or standards), regulation (on labour or environment), control and sharing
information.
2) Agency, association, authority, bureau, board, committee, commission,
corporation, council, foundation, institution, office, organisation, society or
trust.
3) Price, quantity, and standards.
Check Your Progress 3
1) Existence of public goods, externalities, incomplete information, market
power, merit/demerit goods.
2) Social cost is higher than private cost as part of the cost born by some third
party. Social benefit is higher than private benefit as some benefit accrues
to a third party.
3) Goods that are preferred by consumer but are discouraged for consumption
by others in consumer’s interest.
Check Your Progress 4
1) Efficiency mimics with equilibrium price and quantity in perfect competition.
In markets where it does not obtain equilibrium price is higher but equilibrium


--- Page 24 ---
160
Development Strategies quantity is lower. As a result, there is some deadweight loss. Efficiency
interventions try to reduce them. Equity intervention seek to disturb market
equilibrium as its outcomes are perceived to be injurious to certain interests—
say, labour.
2) Pegging wages at more than equilibrium level is likely to create surplus
labour as supply quantity increases while demand quantity decreases. It
might result in lower income to wage earners.
3) Enhancement of entrepreneurial skills is likely to improve entrepreneur’s
income.
Check Your Progress 5
1) Article 39(b).
2) Seventh Schedule of the Constitution under Article 246.
3) Both Parliament and State Legislature can legislate on the subject. Should
there be a contradiction, legislation by Parliament shall prevail.
Check Your Progress 6
1) Intervention is welcome while interference is resisted.
2) Rent-seeking, regulatory capture, pursuit of self-interest, and irrational
electoral demand.
