--- Page 52 ---
188
Development Strategies
8.1 INTRODUCTION
The economic systems world over have been deregulated and controls that existed
in the past have been relaxed in great measure.  At the same time, governments
have been attempting to open  more economic activity to private players– both
domestic as well as foreign. Liberalisation, Privatisation and Globalisation (LPG)
forms part of a wider reform process, as discussed in the previous unit. The
narrative of “Rising India” over the past quarter century describes India’s
economic rise and, as a consequence of that rise, India’s globalisation and
integration with rest of the world. Further, there is a growing recognition that
India was liberating itself from the historical past.
The turn of the century was when a new narrative about independent India began
to take root internationally. India had not only come out of a serious economic
crisis in 1991-92, but had landed on its feet. Trade liberalisation, industrial
delicensing and decontrol and fiscal stabilisation contributed to an increase in
the share of foreign trade and manufacturing output in national income,
contributing also to improved prospects for growth. Investors’ confidence in the
economy got a boost, resulting in a build-up of its growth potential. New firms
began to come up and so did new industries. However, the slowing down of the
economy in the second decade of this millennium  be it due to cyclical or structural
factors, has raised questions about India’s growth potential and the government’s
management of the economy. A new narrative can only be built on the foundations
of improved economic performance. A return to the earlier growth path is
predicated upon altering recent perceptions about India’s economic prospects
and policies, the political choices made and geopolitical options explored.
The most contentious of all economic reform measures since 1991, is
disinvestment. Disinvestment and privatisation have been two policies common
to all Central Governments since 1991. The economic reforms initiated in the
country provide the policy environment towards public private partnership (PPP)
in infrastructure development. Insolvency is a complex subject. Bankruptcy laws
accept that business ventures can fail and allow entrepreneurs to get a fresh start.
The passage of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code in May 2016 was a key
reform which is set to alter the relationship between debtors and creditors. Given
this backdrop and the more general narrative on India’s economic reforms since
1991 discussed earlier, this unit will discuss various facets of three ongoing
debates having repercussion on the performance of Indian economy and these
are:
i) Privatisation and restructuring of public sector,
ii) Public private partnership, and
iii) Insolvency and bankruptcy code (IBC).
8.2 PRIV ATISATION AND RESTRUCTURING OF
PUBLIC SECTOR
Privatisation describes a direction of change or a fundamental reordering of claims
in a society. Its meaning depends on the point of departure– the public-private
balance previously forged in a particular domain. The term ‘privatisation’ connotes
a wide range of ideas. In its narrow sense it is the process of transferring ownership
of a business, enterprise, agency, public service or public property from the public


--- Page 53 ---
189
Major Developments in Post
Economic Reform Period
sector (i.e., government) to the private sector. In the wider sense it means
government outsourcing of services or functions to private firms.  According to
V .V . Ramanadham (1989) privatisation is a term that is employed to convey a
variety of ideas. The idea that it most prominently suggests is that of
‘denationalisation’ (in the sense of transferring the ownership of a public enterprise
to private hands).
Another idea in vogue is ‘liberalisation and deregulation’ unleashing forces of
competition
1. The concept of privatisation is, in fact, to be understood, not merely
in the structural sense of who owns an enterprise, but in the substantive sense of
how far the operations of an enterprise are brought within the discipline of market
forces.
8.3 DIFFERENCE BETWEEN DISINVESTMENT
AND PRIV ATISATION
Though privatisation and disinvestment are terms that are used interchangeably,
there is a difference between them with regard to the ownership. Disinvestment
may or may not be an outcome of privatisation. When it comes to defining the
term, privatisation
 i
nvolves transforming the ownership of a public sector business
to the private sector known as a “strategic buyer”. In privatisation, full ownership
is transferred to the strategic partner. In a broader sense, privatisation refers to
transfer of any government function to the private sector including governmental
functions like revenue collection and law enforcement.
In disinvestment, the same transformation process happens while retaining 26
per cent or in some cases 51 per cent of share right (i.e. the voting power) with
the public sector organisation. Here, the ownership is not transferred to strategic
buyer. Divestment is said as the opposite of Investment. Investment means
acquisition of certain assets; divestment means the release of assets. A business
may be that a particular arm of it is not compatible with its core business and
hence may decide to shelve or divest this business. Divestment may be done for
various economic or social reasons.
8.3.1 Forms of Privatisation
Various forms of privatisation vary in the extent to which they move ownership,
finance, and accountability out of the public sector. The spectrum of alternatives
runs from total privatisation (as in government disengagement from some policy
domain) to partial privatisation (as in contracting-out or vouchers). Thus,
privatisation may include policies anywhere along this spectrum; however, the
implications of privatisation vary with its degree. According to Ramanadhan
(1989) privatisation cover three sets of approaches like ownership, organisational,
and operational measures. It is important to remember that all these measures
more often are equated with transfer of ownership and transfer of managerial
and operational control to private hands.
1 Competition plays a key role in ensuring productive, efficient, innovative and responsive markets.
It ensures availability of ‘goods’ and ‘services’ of acceptable quality at affordable price to the
consumers. Competition law, also referred to as anti-trust law, aims at promoting or maintaining
market competition by regulating anti-competitive conduct. The first Indian competition law
was the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices (MRTP) Act, enacted in 1969 to encourage
fair play and fair deal in the market besides promoting healthy competition. In line with the
international trend and to cope with changing realities introduced by the reforms of 1990s, India
reviewed the MRTP Act, 1969, and enacted the Competition Act, 2002.


--- Page 54 ---
190
Development Strategies
8.4 NEED FOR PRIV ATISATION
The industrial policy of July 1991 is considered as a precursor of economic reforms
which brought a change in the approach towards Public Sector Undertakings
(PSUs). In the affairs of the public sector, it has been a game of politics throughout,
and still is, despite the talk of structural adjustments and economic reforms.
Some of the important factors leading to the need for privatisation are as under:
i) PSUs in India have no autonomy. As a result, a culture has developed that
their major clientele are not the customers who pay for their services, but
the ministers and officials of their controlling ministries.
ii) PSUs have many objectives imposed on them, some of which affect their
efficiency and profitability. In fact, PSUs suffer from multiple principals
and multiple objectives. As a rule, interventions through PSUs are both
inefficient and costly. India needs privatisation to improve efficiency and to
liquidate recurring liabilities for the government.
iii) Ownership should not matter to performance. That it does in India is a
reflection on the poor understanding of business by the bureaucracy. It also
indicates their lack of accountability. Poor performance only impacts on
government budgets, not on individual officials.
iv) It is important to note that there are limitations being government as owner.
Rao (1998) has emphasised that “the enterprise comes under a Ministry of
Government, and is subject to scrutiny by Parliament. The Government of
the party in power exercises ownership through the Minister while the
permanent civil service translates the will of the Government through the
management of the enterprises. But the Minister and civil servant are
temporary occupants of the owner’s chairs because of frequent changes in
their portfolios. There are controls exercised on the enterprise at all levels.”
v) “Public sector managers, who perform better in the liberated circumstances
of private sector enterprises, have been known to complain that they are
crippled by various regulations in a public sector entity.  Unless a radical
transformation is made to liberate the public sector manager from multiple
scrutiny by organs of investigation and vigilance, a level playing field cannot
be established between the public sector and the private sector”
(Venkitaramanan, 2005).
Privatisation per se does not lead to efficiency. Decontrol is probably a more
important principle than privatisation; and many of the supposed positive attributes
of privatisation can be imparted to public enterprises. In India, wholesale transfer
of assets to private sector both on grounds of efficiency and equity is not easily
acceptable. On the other hand, organisational efficiency requires a different
approach. The framework of principal-agent relationship in private ownership
has an advantage over public ownership.  In the sense that both the principal and
the agent have stakes in the efficient functioning of the enterprise and there is
unanimity on the objective function to be maximised.
