--- Page 34 ---
170
Development Strategies
7.4 ONSET OF CURRENT ECONOMIC REFORMS
7.4.1 The Crisis
Fiscal profligacy of 1980s resulted in high fiscal deficit, public debt and external
debt, thus creating internal and external imbalances. By 1990-91, gross combined
(Union and State) fiscal deficit had crossed 10 per cent of GDP, combined public
debt to 70 per cent of GDP, and external national debt ($83 billion) to 30 per cent
of GDP– partly because of gradual withdrawal of foreign concessional aid. Debt
service burden of the Union Government was more than 35 per cent of its revenue
receipts. But more than that, forex reserves were so low as to account for only
7.0 per cent of total debt. Short-term debt to forex reserves was 145 per cent,
making its debt-service ratio 35 per cent of exports. Current account deficit in
the Balance of Payments crossed 3.0 per cent of GDP, largely on account of a
gradual liberalisation of imports without the commensurate improvement in
exports. Inflation also accelerated to double digit level despite three consecutive
good monsoons and harvest.
Changes in the international context associated with the gulf war, triggered by
Iraq attacking Kuwait in mid-1990, put India into a serious crisis as its import
bill swelled and export receipts plummeted, and, thus, current account deficit on
balance of payment accentuated. In this scenario, NRIs started withdrawing their
deposits in foreign currency from banks. Short-term foreign capital also out-
flowed. As a consequence, forex reserves depleted down to $1.2 billion in January
1991 and further depleted to $0.6 billion by June 1991–  just equivalent to about
three-weeks’ imports. There was thus a full-blown BoP crisis at hand.
India sought help from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to tide over BoP
crisis by seeking an emergency loan of $2.2 billion. IMF gave a standby loan of
$0.72 billion in January 1991 to be utilised in three months’ time. For the first
time, the country came to the brink of default in servicing the debt. India had to
airlift some part of its gold stock (primarily the gold confiscated from smugglers)
out of its forex reserves to Bank of England and Union Bank of Switzerland as
collateral to secure loan on terms that were not too steep. This was the time when
India had a caretaker government headed by PM Chandrashekhar (March-June
1991) at the Centre. With its back against the wall, the country had no option but
to set into motion comprehensive economic reforms. It is often said that the
crisis of 1991 was predictable, given the buildup of macroeconomic imbalances
in 1980s, but the Gulf war precipitated it.
The loan contracted was too little. It was natural for the new Government which
came into power with PV Narasimha Rao as Prime Minister and Manmohan
Singh as Finance Minister to approach for a loan of $2.5 billion dollars from
IMF and another of $0.5 billion from the World Bank. IMF and the World Bank
were willing to rescue the Indian economy but sought compliance with
conditionalities, as is their wont, in terms of implementing reforms package
involving macroeconomic stabilisation policies and microeconomic (sectoral)
structural corrections. IMF gave loan of SDR1.656 billion (equivalent to $2.2
billion) under non-concessional stand-by arrangement with a window of 15
months at 7.1 per cent rate of interest. World Bank which normally gives project
specific loans, did come around to giving a loan of 0.25 billion for structural
adjustment. Though these loans were not concessional, yet they were cheaper


--- Page 35 ---
171
Economic Reforms in Indiathan commercial ones– which were not available easily as the country’s credit
rating had dropped considerably.
Manmohan Singh and P.V . Narasimha Rao initiated the reforms in June 1991
with the presentation of the Union Budget. They found the conditionalities
attached to the loans taken from international financial institutions as prudent
pieces of advice but set up committees to suggest details for the path to reform
the economic management of the country. These were efficiency seeking reforms.
If there had to be a check on merger or acquisition of private firms, it was not to
check monopoly or restrictive trade practices but to promote economic efficiency.
If a public sector unit had to be sold (privatisation) or partly sold (divested), it
was for improving its economic performance. The sole purpose was to improve
efficiency in the economic system.
7.4.2 Assessment and the Response
Following two paragraphs of the budget speech of Manmohan Singh on 24 July
1991, sum up the direction that was to be taken over the subsequent three decades:
“In the macro-management of the economy, over the medium-term, it should be
our objective to progressively reduce the fiscal deficit of the Central Government,
to move towards a significant reduction of the revenue deficit, and to reduce the
current account deficit in the balance of payments. It is only such prudent
management that would enable us to curb the exponential growth in internal and
external debt and limit the burden on debt servicing, for the Government and the
country, to manageable levels. Indeed, we must make a conscious effort to reduce
the internal debt of the Government and the external debt of the nation, so that
we rely more and more on our own resources to finance the process of
development.”
“Macro-economic stabilisation and fiscal adjustment alone cannot suffice. They
must be supported by essential reforms in economic policy and economic
management, as an integral part of the adjustment process, reforms which would
help to eliminate waste and inefficiency and impart a new element of dynamism
to growth processes in our economy. The thrust of the reform process would be
to increase the efficiency and international competitiveness of industrial
production, to utilise for this purpose foreign investment and foreign technology
to a much greater degree than we have done in the past, to increase the productivity
of investment, to ensure that India’s financial sector is rapidly modernised, and
to improve the performance of the public sector, so that the key sectors of our
economy are enabled to attain an adequate technological and competitive edge
in a fast-changing global economy. I am confident that, after a successful
implementation of stabilisation measures and the essential structural and policy
reforms, our economy would return to a path of a high sustained growth with
reasonable price stability and greater social equity.”
7.4.3 Some Initial Steps Taken by the Government
Immediate response of the Central Government, within 10 days in power, was in
terms of devaluation of rupee. The custodian of the value of rupee RBI devalued
rupee, in quick succession on 1 July and 3 July 1991, by 9 per cent and 11 per
cent against currencies of major trading partners, viz., US Dollar, British Pound,
German Deutsch, and Japanese Yen (Chinese Yuan was not that important at that


--- Page 36 ---
172
Development Strategies stage). This was expected to make exports competitive. Commerce Ministry
withdrew export subsidy and thus saved some public expenditure, as well as
moved towards removing distortion in market prices. After an experiment with
dual exchange rate for a year, external value of rupee was allowed to be determined
by the market forces. In other words, rupee moved from fixed exchange regime
to floating exchange rate. This was most important macroeconomic stabilisation
measure on external front.
In the financial sector, RBI had freed banks to charge interest rates beyond floor
rate, depending upon the risk perception of the borrower. Budget speech of 1991
suggested formation of a high-level committee (Narasimham Committee) to look
into the structure, organisation, functions and procedures of financial institutions.
It was felt that administrative intervention on interest rate had outlived its utility.
It was pointed out that powers of Capital Controller of India (Government) would
be transferred to SEBI which would be empowered through appropriate
legislation. Likewise, Foreign Exchange Regulation Act (FERA, 1973) was set
to be liberalised for non-resident Indians to make investment in India.
Recognising that entry barriers were promoted by proliferation of licensing regime
and that it actually led to increase in the degree of market concentration, Finance
Minister announced the new Industrial Policy  as a part of his Budget Speech on
24 July 1991 (and second part on small scale industries on 6 August, 1991)).
These committed the Government to take a series of initiatives in the five areas
of (a) Industrial Licensing, (b) Foreign Investment, (c) Foreign Technology
Agreements, (d) Public Sector Policy, and (e) MRTP Act. Highlighting that many
small and medium sized entrepreneurs were hampered by the restrictive licensing
regime, it was abolished, except for a set of industries in the categories of security
and strategic importance, hazardous chemicals, overriding environmental reasons
and items of elitist consumption. They were further liberalised. Items reserved
for small scale industries were left untouched in 1991 but gradually done away
with. List of industries reserved for public sector was pruned from 17 (in 1956)
to 8.
While freeing Indian industry from official control, it said, opportunities for
foreign investment should be exploited as it would bring in attendant advantages
of technology transfer, management techniques, marketing strategies and export
potential. Direct approval would be given up to 51 per cent. Likewise, Indian
industries would be allowed to negotiate the terms of technology with foreign
counterparts and this may induce Indian industry to undertake more research
and development activities.
Public sector units which have done very valuable work in early years of the
Indian economy, post-independence were now, in many cases, a burden on the
public resources. In particular, the sick mills which were taken over by the
Government continued to be sick. They were to be referred to the Board for
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction. While there was no reason for public
sector to supply consumer goods and services, it had expanded into these sectors.
Emphasis was for the public sector to operate in reserved or strategic areas or
where reasonable profitability was being maintained. Those public undertakings
that were performing well  were to be given management autonomy. Competition
with private sector was to be encouraged. And in some cases, disinvestment of
equity share was to be carried out.
