--- Page 1 ---
137
Physical and Social
Infrastructure
Block 2
Development Strategies


--- Page 2 ---
138
Development Strategies
BLOCK 2   DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES
The state and market as institutions play significant role in the process of economic
development. However, the role of these two institutions in India as an instrument
of economic development has changed over time.
During the first four decades of development planning, India relied heavily on
the public sector which was favoured as the engine of development.  During this
period, the state played mainly the regulatory, entrepreneurial and planning role.
However, after 1991 the inward-looking development strategy was replaced by
outward-oriented strategy popularly known as liberalisation, privatisation and
globalisation (LPG) strategy, wherein private sector is considered as an engine
of growth.  Under this strategy, free functioning market acts as the guiding force
in the major policy decisions and state works more as facilitator and promoter of
economic activities and less as regulator.  This block deals with re-defining the
role of state and market and changing development strategies adopted over a
period of time.  The Block comprises three units.
Unit 6: State and Market: Indian Context throws light on the various forms of
state intervention in economic activities, state’s intervention for achieving the
goal of efficiency and promoting equity and state’s intervention in market as
envisaged in Indian Constitution.
Unit 7 : Economic Reforms in India  covers the rationale behind economic
reforms, the constituents of economic reforms and impact of economic reforms
on Indian economy.
Unit 8: Major Developments in Post Economic Reforms Period identifies the
key challenges on the road to India’s development, analyse the hurdles in the
process of restructuring public sector undertakings, highlights the pros and cons
of public and private partnership, and underlines the need for insolvency and
bankruptcy code (IBC) and the problems associated with it.


--- Page 3 ---
139
State and Market: Indian
ContextUNIT 6 STATE AND MARKET: INDIAN
CONTEXT
Structure
6.0 Objectives
6.1 Introduction
6.2 State and Market
6.2.1 State and Government
6.2.2 Market: Meaning and Forms
6.2.3 Premises of Market
6.3 State Intervention in Market: Instruments and Institutions
6.3.1 Ownership and Operation
6.3.2 Regulation and Control
6.3.3 Promotion and Support
6.3.4 Protection
6.4 State Intervention in Market for Efficiency
6.4.1 Rationale for State Intervention in Market
6.4.2 Public Goods
6.4.3 Externalities
6.4.4 Monopoly Power
6.4.5 Information Asymmetries
6.4.6 Merit and Demerit Goods
6.5 State Intervention in Market to Promote Equity
6.5.1 Goods Markets
6.5.2 Factor Markets
6.6 State Intervention in Market and Indian Constitution
6.6.1 General Direction
6.6.2 Particular Areas
6.7 State Intervention and State Interference
6.8 Let Us Sum Up
6.9 Term-end Exercises
6.10 Key Words
6.11 References
6.12 Answer or Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises
Appendix 6.1
6.0 OBJECTIVES
After reading this unit, you will be able to:
differentiate between State and Government;
describe different meanings of Market;
