--- Page 11 ---
 
245 
 
Central Banks and the 
Supply of Money 
 
Box 15.1: Repo Rate and Bank Rate 
Most of the time we are confused between various interest rates such as bank 
rate or discount rate, repo rate and neighbouring rate in the banking system. 
Repo Rate: The banks approach the central bank for financial assistance if they 
face crisis. The interest rate charged on banks by RBI to provide such financial 
assistance against of certain securities or bonds, is the repo rate. In other words, 
“commercial banks borrow money from RBI by selling securities or bonds with 
an agreement to repurchase the securities on a certain date at a predetermined 
price. The rate of interest charged by the central bank on the cash borrowed by 
commercial banks is called the Repo Rate”. For example, if a commercial bank 
borrows or takes a loan of Rs. 100,000 at the predetermined repo rate of 5%, the 
interest to be paid to RBI at the maturity is Rs.5000. 
In other scenario, if a commercial bank has excess funds, the bank deposits it in 
RBI and earns interest at a rate known as ‘reverse repo rate’. For example, if a 
commercial bank deposits Rs. 100,000 at the reverse repo rate of 4%, the 
interest to be paid by RBI to the bank at the maturity is Rs.4000. 
RBI controls the liquidity in the market through repo rate. With an objective of 
increasing liquidity, RBI reduces repo rate, which encourages the commercial 
banks to sell their securities and borrow from the RBI. On the other hand, RBI 
increases the repo rate, which discourages the banks from selling their securities, 
which decreases liquidity or the supply of money.  
Bank Rate: The rate of interest charged by the central bank on the loans it has 
extended to commercial banks and other financial institutions is called “Bank 
Rate”. In this case, there is no repurchasing agreement signed, no securities sold, 
and no collateral involved.  
Banks also borrow funds from RBI and extend loan to their customers, which is 
an important source of their profit. Hence, they borrow funds from RBI without 
involvement of the repurchasing agreement, securities or bonds. The interest 
charged on such borrowing of commercial bank is the bank rate, which is 
usually higher than Repo Rate. This is an important weapon of RBI to control 
liquidity in the market. The increase in bank rate by RBI increases the 
borrowing costs of the banks which, in turn, reduce the supply of money. The 
bank rate is also called the discount rate.  
There is another concept in the banking system that is the overnight rate. The 
commercial banks also borrow funds among themselves. The rate charged on 
such borrowing of funds is known as the overnight rate.  


--- Page 12 ---
 
246 
 
Issues in  
Monetary Policy 
Sometimes the OMO is used to neutralise the impact of other factors on money 
supply. For instance, change in the exchange rate affects money supply. The 
central bank intervenes in the foreign exchange market by buying or selling 
foreign exchange to regulate the volatility of the domestic currency. Suppose, for 
example, the objective of the RBI is to check the appreciation of the Rupee. In 
order to realise this objective, the RBI would buy foreign currency (say US 
Dollar). With supply remaining the same, if the demand for US Dollar increases, 
the value of Indian Rupee will decrease. In the process, there would be some 
increase in money supply. In order to neutralise the increase in money supply, the 
RBI may choose the option of open market operations, and sell government 
securities in the market. It means that a central bank sells government securities 
to absorb the extra money supply, which came up due to its exchange rate 
policies. Neutralising such impact of change in foreign exchange reserves on the 
money supply through the OMO, or the selling of government securities, is 
known as the process of ‘sterilization’. 
Specifically, if the goal is to control inflation, the central bank sets a target of a 
higher interest rate by selling securities in the open market. A higher interest rate 
indicates less liquidity in the banking system, which leads to an increase in the 
interest rates charged by banks to their customers. Along with the decline in 
consumer expenditure, it also makes certain investment projects costly. As a 
consequence of higher interest rate, investment spending in the economy will 
decline. As a result of higher interest rate, consumption expenditure may decline, 
particularly those segment which is funded by borrowings from commercial 
banks. Further, households may allocate more to saving and less to consumption 
because of the increase in interest rate. As these are the components of aggregate 
demand, aggregate demand would decline because of the rise in interest rate. If 
aggregate demand falls, the price level would be negatively affected and the 
intended goal of controlling inflation is realised.  
  Interest Rate (i) 
Ms Ms’ 
A 
B 
Md 
i0 
i1 
0 Cash  
Balances 
M଴
P  Mଵ
P  
Fig.15.1: Effect of Increase in Money Supply 


--- Page 13 ---
 
247 
 
Central Banks and the 
Supply of Money 
Let us explain the effect of an increase in interest rate on money supply through 
diagram. In Fig. 15.1 we indicate cash balances, money supply and money 
demand on the x-axis. On the y-axis we take interest rate ( i). We know that 
demand for money depends upon income and interest rate such that, Md = f[Y, i]. 
Here demand for money is an increasing function in income (Y) and decreasing 
function in interest rate. Money supply is given by a vertical straight line at the 
level Ms = M/P, where M/P indicates the purchasing power of available money 
balances. In equilibrium, 
 Md = Ms or Md = M/P      …(15.8) 
If the price level remains unchanged, the real cash balances can be changed only 
through the changes in money supply. An increase in money supply or real 
money balances through OMO tools of the central bank shifts the M S function to 
the right (from 𝑀௦  to  𝑀௦
′  in Fig.15.1). The main goal of such a policy is to 
stimulate aggregate demand. The implementation of this policy results in excess 
supply of money mainly in the form of excess reserves and thus loanable funds/ 
reserves. Consequently, it results in a fall in the interest rates charged by the 
commercial banks to customers on credit.  
Check Your Progress 3 
1) What is meant by open market operations? Explain how it affects money 
supply and interest rate in the economy. 
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................... 
2) Explain the differences between bank rate, discount rate, repo rate, 
reverse repo rate, and overnight rate. 
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................... 
15.4 LET US SUM UP 
There is no unique definition of money supply. Central banks measure money 
supply through a series of monetary measures. The currency notes and coins, and 
the deposits of banks with the central bank form the monetary base of an 
economy. Monetary aggregates such as M0 and M1 are known as ‘narrow 
money’ whereas M3 is said to be ‘broad money’.  


--- Page 14 ---
 
248 
 
Issues in  
Monetary Policy 
The monetary base of an economy increases over time, which increases the 
money stock in the economy in a multiplicative manner. The multiple by which 
money stock increases against the monetary base is known as money multiplier. 
Money supply can be controlled through various tools of the central bank such as 
open market operations, changes in the rate of interests and exchange rates. If the 
objective of the central bank is to check inflation, the central bank would regulate 
money supply by buying government securities from the commercial banks and 
other financial institutions. The RBI can also increase the bank rate and repo rate, 
which will increase the borrowing cost of commercial banks, which in turn would 
decrease money supply. Higher interest rate affects investments and household 
consumptions negatively. It leads to decline in the aggregate demand in the 
economy which affects the price level. That means there is a strong linkage 
between the monetary policy of an economy and its real sector. 
15.5 ANSWER/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS 
 EXERCISES  
Check Your Progress 1 
1) Refer to Section 15.2 and Table 15.1. Your answer should include the 
monetary aggregates NM0 to NM3, and L1 to L3.
 
2) Refer to Section 15.2, particularly Table 15.1, and answer. 
3) Refer to Section 15.2, particularly Table 15.1, and answer. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) It is the ratio of the money stock measured as M1 to the monetary base. 
Derive the equations on the basis of Section 15.3.  
2)  It denotes the ratio of currency with the non-bank public to the money 
stock measured by M1. Derive equation (15.6) and interpret it. 
 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) The process of changing the monetary base through buying or selling of 
the government securities is known as the Open Market Operations. Use 
Fig.15.1 to explain the effect of interest rate on money supply and interest 
rate.  
2) Refer to Box 15.1 in Section 15.3 and answer. 
 
 


--- Page 15 ---
 
 
UNIT 16  CONDUCT OF MONETARY POLICY  
Structure  
16.0  Objectives 
16.1  Introduction  
16.2  Monetary Policy Types 
16.3  Goals and Targets of Monetary Policy  
16.4  Credit Control Measures 
          16.4.1 Quantitative Credit Control Measures 
          16.4.2 Qualitative Credit Control Measures 
16.5  Monetary policy In India 
16.6  Transmission Mechanism of Monetary Policy 
16.7  Let Us Sum Up 
16.8  Answers/ Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises  
16.0  OBJECTIVES  
After going through the unit you will be in a position to: 
 distinguish between goals and targets of monetary policy;  
 explain various credit control measures under monetary policy; 
 identify the instruments of monetary policy and their role; and 
 identify and explain the monetary transmission channels. 
16.1  INTRODUCTION  
In Unit 5 of this course we learnt that in an open economy with flexible exchange 
rate, monetary policy is effective in bringing about economic growth. You can 
appreciate the importance of monetary policy in view of the fact that most 
economies these days follow a flexible or floating exchange rate.  
You may recall that the Classical Economists assumed money to be neutral in the 
sense that it does not have any effect on prices and economic growth. They 
believed that there is duality in the economy such that monetary and real 
variables do not influence one another. It was Keynes who suggested that money 
supply affects real variables. According to him increase in money supply leads to 
a decline in rate of interest, which in turn leads to greater borrowings by firms 
thereby leading higher investment. Higher investment leads to higher output and 
income of the country through a multiplier effect. Thus he visualized a greater 
role for the government. According to him economic policy should be 
countercyclical – it should neutralize the effects of business cycles. The New 
Classical economists attempted to justify the Classical views on the neutrality of 
 
  Prof. Kaustuva Barik and Ms. Apica Sharma, Indira Gandhi National Open University, New 
Delhi 


--- Page 16 ---
 
250 
 
Issues in  
Monetary Policy 
money and brought forth the ‘policy ineffectiveness proposition’.  According to 
the New Classical economists, it is best for the government to stick to certain 
‘policy rules’. Governments in all the countries, however, see an important role 
for monetary policy in the economy and actively pursue a monetary policy.  
In this Unit we will discuss the types of monetary policy that a government 
pursues, the objectives of monetary policy, and the policy instruments available 
to policy makers. In addition, we will discuss how monetary policy works. We 
will bring out certain important channels; the effect of an increase in money 
supply on other economic variables. 
16.2  MONETARY POLICY TYPES 
The macroeconomic policy set by the central bank or the monetary authority of a 
country is known as monetary policy. It is concerned with the management of 
money supply in an economy. The change in money supply usually results in a 
change in rate of interest. The objective of monetary policy is to fulfill the 
objectives of inflation, growth, consumption and liquidity in the economy. 
Monetary policy also aims at maintaining exchange rates with other currencies in 
order to benefit trade, international confidence and policy stability in the country. 
There are certain instruments of monetary policy as we will learn later in this 
Unit.  
Monetary policy could be of two types: expansionary and contractionary. With 
an expansionary monetary policy, the monetary authority tries to stimulate the 
economy using the policy instruments. In contrast, the monetary authority 
attempts to restrict money supply and control inflation with a contractionary 
monetary policy. In an expansionary monetary policy, either a lower than usual 
rate of interest is maintained or money supply is abnormally increased. This is 
done with the hope of providing cheaper credit to the firms so that investment in 
the economy increases. Increase in investment is expected to further increase 
employment and output. Expansionary monetary policy, however, often leads to 
deterioration of the exchange rate of the country with other currencies. If 
increases in money supply lead to higher inflation in the economy, depreciation 
of the domestic currency in the foreign exchange market may take place.    
Under contractionary monetary policy, the instruments of monetary policy aim at 
a different set of results.  If the economy is passing through a very high 
inflationary condition (if the economy is over-heated), the monetary authority 
usually resorts to a higher than usual rate of interest or abnormally low money 
supply. If contractionary monetary policy is implemented too vigorously, there 
may be decrease in production, increase in unemployment, and fall in aggregate 
demand leading to recessionary stage of the business cycle.   


--- Page 17 ---
 
251 
 
Conduct of  
Monetary Policy 16.3  GOALS AND TARGETS OF MONETARY 
 POLICY  
You should note that there is a difference between the goals and the targets of 
monetary policy. Goals of monetary policy are the objectives it aims to achieve, 
that is, reducing inflation, achieving full employment or maximising economic 
growth. On the other hand, targets of monetary policy are the variables targeted 
such as money supply, bank credit, and short term interest rates through the 
instruments of monetary policy.  
Monetary policy is one of the instruments of the overall economic policy of a 
country; hence its objectives are no different than the overall economic policy 
objectives of the economy. As per the prevailing economic, political, historical 
and international conditions, there are changes in the priorities given to the 
objectives of the monetary policy. Hence, they differ amongst developed and 
developing countries. The significant objectives of monetary policy are 
 to ensure price stability, that is, containing inflation, 
 to promote economic growth, 
 to ensure stability of the exchange rate of the currency, 
 to achieve full employment, 
 to reach equilibrium in the balance of payments account, and  
 to reduce economic inequality. 
Let us explain below these objectives in some detail.  
a) Price Stability  
Controlling inflation is generally considered to be the foremost objective 
amongst developing economies as high inflation has an otherwise negative 
impact on growth and distribution. Price stability means relative price stability, 
depending on the prevailing conditions in the economy. Hence, by maintaining 
relative price stability there is a considerable check on the fluctuations in the 
business cycle leading to stability in the economic growth process as a whole.  
Price stability does not mean that prices should not increase at all. There should 
be a reasonable rate of inflation in an economy so that there is incentive for 
production and economic growth. There is no consensus among economists, 
however, on an ideal rate of inflation; it varies across countries and over period 
of time. In countries like the US, an inflation rate of around 2 per cent is targeted. 
In India, an inflation rate of 4 per cent with a tolerance band of 2 per cent is 
considered as ideal (it implies that inflation should not be outside the range of 2 
per cent to 6 per cent).   
Many countries have faced episodes of abnormally high inflation. In 2019, for 
example, some countries are experiencing exceptionally high inflation – 
Venezuela has an inflation rate of about 10 million per cent per year! Argentina, 
Iran and Sudan are facing inflation rate of above 25 per cent per year. 
Abnormally high inflation leads to rise in the cost of living of the poor, makes 


--- Page 18 ---
 
252 
 
Issues in  
Monetary Policy 
exports more expensive, lowers the rate of savings which further hampers 
economic growth and encourages unproductive investment such as jewelry, real 
estate, etc. During abnormally high inflationary scenario, contractionary 
monetary policy is used. In period of relatively stable inflation, the monetary 
authority pursues a monetary policy such that price stability with economic 
growth and employment generation are maintained.  
b) Economic Growth  
Promoting economic growth is another important objective of both developed 
and developing countries. Economic growth implies growth in the productive 
capacity of the economy so that real national income increases. To achieve 
economic growth, the rate of savings and investments need to increase. Monetary 
policy can help produce favorable effects to the requirements of economic 
growth by directing the banking sector towards priority sector lending or making 
appropriate changes in interest rate to incentivize people to save.  
With the openness of the economy and floating exchange rate, the goal to achieve 
increased economic growth through instruments of monetary policy may 
contradict with the goal of exchange rate stability. In order to prevent the 
depreciation of the currency, a tight monetary policy need to be maintained but 
the higher rate of interests will reduce liquidity in the banking system. This 
reduction in liquidity results in increased cost of lending and lesser production 
and increased unemployment in the economy. These contradictory objectives 
result in a trade off in the policy circles and considering the other political, social 
and economic objectives, a final decision is reached.  
c) Exchange Rate Stability 
Almost all major economies of the world have started following the flexible 
exchange rate system under which the exchange rate of the currency is 
determined by the demand for and supply of foreign exchange. Whenever there is 
disequilibrium in the demand and supply of foreign exchange, the external value 
of the currency changes. The domestic investors demand foreign currency when 
there is profitable investment possible abroad whereas they demand home 
currency more when there is profitable investment at home.  
Under floating exchange rate the central bank or the monetary authority 
intervenes to avoid sharp fluctuations in the exchange rate. In order to prevent 
depreciation of rupee, the central bank can release more foreign currency from its 
foreign exchange reserves. Also the central bank can increase the short term 
lending rates and increase the required cash reserve ratio (CRR) in order to 
reduce the demand for the foreign currency.  
d) Full Employment 
In order to achieve maximum social welfare it is imperative that the economy 
attains full employment. Any country will prosper when all its people get the job 
that they desire to do at the prevailing wage rate. With a tight monetary policy, 
the objective of full employment and growth contradicts. Hence, in order to 
increase the level of employment the central bank or the monetary authority will 
have to adopt expansionary monetary policy.  


--- Page 19 ---
 
253 
 
Conduct of  
Monetary Policy 
e) Balance of Payments Equilibrium  
Abnormally high current account deficit (CAD) is financed through increase in 
nominal capital inflows which is achieved through the depreciation of the home 
currency. Thus, imports become very expensive and there is increase in inflation 
in the economy. A tighter monetary policy helps reduce these effects through 
high cost of credit and lower availability of money with the importers, thus 
curbing imports.  
Hence, monetary policy plays a significant role in maintaining the current 
account deficit at the reasonable level. Balance of Payments equilibrium implies 
exchange rate stability.  
f) Economic Inequality  
There is increased income inequality amongst the developed and developing 
countries. This increased inequality leads to reduction in social welfare and 
increased frustration amongst the masses. Monetary policy as an economic 
instrument aims to achieve equitable distribution of income and wealth through 
priority sector availability of credit to the weaker sections of the society at very 
low rate of interests.  
The targets of monetary policy are generally the following three parameters: 
 to regulate the supply of money/ credit 
 to maintain a reasonable rate of interest or cost of money/credit 
 to conveniently avail money/ credit  
a) Supply of Money  
The currency issued by the monetary authority and the demand deposits with the 
commercial bank comprise the supply of money. The issue of currency by the 
central bank needs to be flexible enough depending on the inflationary or 
recessionary stages prevailing in the economy. The banking system also needs to 
play a progressive role in facilitating demand deposits with the banks.  
b) Rate of interest or Cost of Money 
Underdeveloped economies generally adopt an expansionary monetary policy in 
order to promote sectors like agriculture and industry. Policy of discriminatory 
rate of interests is often followed in order to promote priority sector lending. For 
example, lower rate of interest is charged from the priority sectors such as micro, 
small and medium enterprises (MSME). Simultaneously, higher rates of interest 
may be charged from unproductive and luxurious spending so that higher credit 
is made available to the priority sector.  
During inflationary stage of the business cycle, the monetary authority keeps the 
rate of interest at a higher level to curb money supply in the economy. In 
contrast, during the recession phase, the monetary authority may decide to keep 
the interest rate at a lower rate. It is expected that lower interest rate will provide 
incentives for higher production, employment and growth.  
