--- Page 20 ---
 
254 
 
Issues in  
Monetary Policy 
c) Availability of Credit  
The ease with which credit is available in the economy is an important factor for 
economic growth. The eligibility and norms to avail credit from the financial 
system are set by the central bank or monetary authority of the country; hence, 
these norms are part of the monetary policy. 
16.4  MONETARY POLICY INSTRUMENTS  
The various instruments of monetary policy to control credit are divided in two 
categories, namely, Quantitative and Qualitative measures. Quantitative credit 
control measures are non-discriminatory in nature, say for example, when a 
certain interest rate is set by the central bank of a country, that rate applies to the 
banking system of the country as a whole. In contrast, Qualitative / Selective 
credit control measures vary from one section of the society to the other.  
16.4.1 Quantitative Credit Control Measures  
The important quantitative credit control instruments of the monetary policy are 
as follows: 
 Bank Rate 
 Open Market Operations 
 Change in Minimum Reserve Ratio 
 Change in Liquidity Ratio 
a) Bank Rate 
The most noticed and significant instrument of monetary policy is the rate of 
interest on borrowing and lending set by the central bank or monetary authority 
of the country. Bank rate is the rate of interest at which the central bank provides 
loans to commercial banks and other financial institutions. Increase in bank rate 
has the effect of increasing the rate of interest in the economy. Similarly, 
decrease in bank rate lowers the rate of interest in the economy. Higher bank rate 
lowers the extent of credit creation in the economy which leads to a decline in 
aggregate demand and hence lower prices. On the other hand, in a recessionary 
phase a lower bank rate is propounded. Borrowing from the central bank, usually 
for short period, by the commercial banks is done through the ‘repo rate’. 
Similarly, commercial banks can deposit their excess liquidity in the central bank 
for which the ‘reverse repo rate’ is applicable.  
b) Open Market Operations  
Purchase and sale of securities in the open market by the central bank or the 
monetary authority is popularly known as open market operations. In order to 
contract the credit in the economy, the central bank sells securities in the open 
market. This leads to fall in aggregate demand and reduction in price level. 
Whereas, when credit is to be expanded, there is purchase of securities by the 


--- Page 21 ---
 
255 
 
Conduct of  
Monetary Policy central bank in the open market. This leads to increase in money supply which 
leads to increase in aggregate demand and production level in the economy.  
c) Cash Reserve Ratio 
The commercial banks are required to keep a certain percentage of their total 
deposits as cash with the central bank of the country. If the aim of the central 
bank is to reduce supply of money in the economy, it will raise the cash reserve 
ratio (CRR). An implication of higher CRR is that commercial banks are required 
to keep a higher percentage of their deposits in the form of cash with the central 
bank. Thus a lesser amount is left for lending purposes. In contrast, reducing the 
CRR would increase the credit creation in the economy as commercial banks 
have larger availability of funds with them for the purpose of lending and 
creating credit.  
c) Statutory Liquidity Ratio  
Statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) requires every bank to keep certain proportion of 
its total deposits in the form of liquid (or near liquid) assets. When the central 
bank needs to reduce credit, it raises the SLR. On the other hand, when the 
objective of the central bank is to expand credit, it reduces the SLR.  
16.4.2 Qualitative Credit Control Measures  
Very often the monetary authority in a country controls the supply of credit in the 
economy. Thus financial institutions may not extend credit to a borrower even if 
he/she has a demand for credit. These measures are selective in nature (because 
of it, they are often called selective credit control measures also) such that these 
measures target certain sectors of the economy or certain sections of the society. 
Secondly, it is discriminatory in the sense that different segments get differential 
treatments. Thirdly, there is a market failure in the sense that supply and demand 
for credit are not taken into consideration. Fourthly, there is disequilibrium in the 
credit market – supply and demand do not match.  
We can classify qualitative nature can be classified in the following types: 
 Change in margin requirement  
 Credit rationing  
 Direct action  
a) Margin Requirement  
Margin requirement is the margin between the value of goods pledged as security 
and the amount of loan. If the central bank finds that traders of any particular 
area are stock piling certain commodities which leads to an increase in prices of 
those commodities in the market, then the margin requirements of those 


--- Page 22 ---
 
256 
 
Issues in  
Monetary Policy commodities are increased. This way credit is contracted and those defaulting 
traders are punished. 
b) Credit Rationing  
May a time the central bank resorts to credit rationing. Through rationing of 
credit, the central bank can perform the following tasks: 
 It can decline loan to a particular commercial  bank 
 It can reduce the total amount of loan to all the commercial banks in 
general. 
 It can fix a certain quota for different banks. 
Hence, through the above selective credit rationing methods, the central bank can 
increase or reduce the credit in the market. 
c) Direct Action  
Central bank can take extreme actions against those commercial banks that 
disobey its directives. One such extreme action is directly imposing harsh 
restrictions on the credit of those commercial banks.  
16.5 MONETARY POLICY IN INDIA 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is the institution responsible for monetary policy 
framework in India. The policy targets and instruments of RBI have changed 
over the years in tandem with the domestic and global structural changes. Hence, 
in brief we discuss the evolution of monetary policy in India.  
16.5.1 Early Years of Monetary Policy 
Post Independence; say from 1950 to 1970, the RBI provided support to the 
government’s plan expenditure using deficit financing. It was the 
industrialization phase when large scale public sector investments were financed 
by borrowing from the RBI. The RBI then focused on selective credit control 
check inflation while making sure that credit flowed to priority sectors. Since 
1971, up to mid 1980s, the Indian government relied more on fiscal policy 
measures compared to monetary policy as Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) and 
Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) were increased. The high level of inflation in the 
1980s led to the adoption of monetary targeting framework on the 
recommendations of the Sukhamoy Chakravarty Committee in 1985. 
After the economic reforms of 1991, the RBI’s role underwent a significant 
change. Steps were taken to curb the monetization of fiscal deficit. Say for 
example, by 1997 the ad-hoc treasury bills were completely phased out. 
However, monetization of fiscal deficit continued through primary issue of public 
debt in auctions. Since April 2006, the RBI is not allowed to subscribe to the 
primary issue of public debt.   


--- Page 23 ---
 
257 
 
Conduct of  
Monetary Policy 
16.5.2 Liquidity Adjustment Facility  
Multiple indicator approach was adopted by RBI in 1998 in which high 
frequency financial market rates and fortnightly/ monthly indicators were tracked 
along with the output data for monetary policy purposes. In April 1999, on the 
recommendations of the Narasimham Committee (second committee), Interim 
Liquidity Adjustment Facility (ILAF) was introduced.  Repo and reverse repo 
rates emerged as the primary policy rates of the RBI and the significance of CRR 
and SLR as instruments of RBI to manage liquidity got reduced. However, the 
ILAF suffered from non-existence of a ceiling rate and no unique policy rate. 
Hence, since May 2011 the repo rate has become the only independently varying 
rate under the Revised Liquidity Adjustment Framework (RLAF). In September 
2014 the RLAF was fine-tuned following the recommendations of the Urjit Patel 
Committee. In May 2016, the Monetary Policy Framework Agreement (MPFA) 
was signed between the Government of India (GOI) and the RBI to regulate 
inflation and bring it below 4 percent in financial year 2016-17. In case of failure 
on the part of the RBI to comply with the above targets, it is accountable to the 
GOI and suggest reasons and remedies to achieve the same in future by a 
specified date.  
Since February 2019 the RBI has followed an accommodative monetary policy in 
order to provide stimulus to the ailing economy. The RBI, however, realized that 
the Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) do not transmit the rate cuts to the 
general public. In view of the above, the RBI in August 2019 decided to 
formalize the linkage between repo rate and bank lending rates.  
16.6  TRANSMISSION MECHANISM OF MONETARY 
 POLICY 
As mentioned in the beginning of the Unit, monetary policy affects several key 
economic variables in the economy. Monetary policy decision, particularly on 
money supply and interest rate, sets in motion a sequence of effects. 
Transmission mechanism means the process or the channels through which 
monetary policy affects economic variables.  
It is difficult to make a complete list of variables which get affected by a 
monetary policy decision. Economists have attempted to make a comprehensive 
list of the channels. There are differences amongst economists, however, on the 
importance of various channels. We have tried to compile the various channels 
(See Table 18.1) based on the studies of Mishkin (1995), Taylor (1995) and 
Boivin et al. (2010). Second, the impact of monetary policy on all variables is not 
uniform – while certain variables get influenced by a particular monetary policy 
decision to a great extent, the impact is negligible on certain other variables. It 
depends on the policy decision and its target variables. Third, some of these 
effects are visible immediately while certain others are noticeable with a lag. 
  


--- Page 24 ---
 
258 
 
Issues in  
Monetary Policy 
 
Fig. 18.1: Monetary Transmission Mechanism 
CHANNEL CAUSATION CHAIN 
Interest Rate 
Channel 
(a) Nominal 
Variant 
 
 
(b) Real Variant   
 
 
 
 
Money ↑ → Interest Rate ↓ → Investment ↑ → Aggregate Demand ↑ 
 
 
Money ↑ → Expected Price ↑ → Expected Inflation ↑ → Real Interest 
Rate ↓ → Investment ↑ → Aggregate Demand ↑ 
 
Open Economy 
Channel 
 
Exchange Rate 
Channel 
 
 
 
Money ↑ → Interest Rate ↓ → Exchange Rate ↑ (Depreciates) → 
Exports ↑ → Net Exports ↑ → Aggregate Demand ↑  
 
Credit Channel 
(a) Bank 
Lending  
 
(b) Balance 
Sheet 
 
 
 
(c) Cash Flow 
 
 
(d) Unanticipated 
Price Level 
 
(e) Liquidity 
Effects 
 
 
Money ↑ → Deposits ↑ → Bank Loans ↑ → Investment ↑ → Aggregate 
Demand ↑ 
 
Money ↑ → Price of Stocks (Net Worth) ↑ → Adverse Selection ↓ → 
Moral Hazard ↓ → Lending ↑ → Investment ↑ → Aggregate Demand ↑  
 
 
Money ↑ → Interest Rate ↓ → Cash Flow ↑ → Adverse Selection ↓ → 
Moral Hazard ↓ → Lending ↑ → Investment ↑ → Aggregate Demand ↑ 
 
Money ↑ → Unanticipated Price of Stocks ↑ → Adverse Selection ↓ → 
Moral Hazard ↓ → Lending ↑ → Investment ↑ → Aggregate Demand ↑ 
 
Money ↑ → Price of Stocks ↑ → Value of Financial Assets ↑ → 
Likelihood of Financial Distress ↓ → Consumer Durables and Housing 
Expenditure ↑ → Aggregate Demand ↑ 
 
Other Channels 
(a) Wealth Effect  
 
 
(b) Tobin’s q 
 
(c) Expectations 
 
Money ↑ → Price of Stocks ↑ → Wealth ↑ → Consumption ↑ → 
Aggregate Demand ↑ 
 
 
Money ↑ → Price of Stocks ↑ → Tobin’s q ↑ → Investment ↑ → 
Aggregate Demand ↑ 
 
Money ↑ → Expected inflation ↑ → Consumption/Investment ↑ → 
Aggregate Demand ↑ 
 
 
We now elaborate on some of the above transmission channels.  


--- Page 25 ---
 
259 
 
Conduct of  
Monetary Policy 
a) Interest Rate Channel  
Nominal Interest Rate: When there is an increase in money supply it leads to a 
decline in nominal interest rate which further raises the incentives for investment. 
An increase in investment has obvious impact of increase in aggregate demand.  
Real Interest Rate: An increase in money supply increases the expected price 
level, that is, it raises the rate of inflation in the economy leading to fall in the 
real rate of interest. The fall in interest rate raises investment and as a 
consequence the aggregate demand. The increase in expected price also provides 
an incentive to firms to increase production. 
We know from rational expectations hypothesis that the average of short term 
rates is the long term rate. Therefore, transmission from short term rates to long 
term rates is essential for this transmission channel to be effective. For a 
developing economy like India, the costs of funding does not decrease in short 
term as substantial segment of the deposits in banks are long term in nature. 
Developing countries generally have an underdeveloped bond markets, less 
competition in the banking sector, and existence of a large informal sector for 
credit. These factors make the transmission mechanism through this channel 
extremely weak.  
b) Open Economy Channel 
Exchange Rate: An increase in money supply leads to fall in interest rate. Fall in 
interest rate leads to outflow of funds, as investors find it more profitable to 
invest abroad. This leads to decrease in supply of foreign currency which leads to 
depreciation of the domestic currency. Depreciation of domestic currency leads 
to increase in net exports leading to an increase in aggregate demand.  
After the economic reforms of the 1990s, the Indian economy gradually opened 
up to the external sector. Therefore, the importance of this channel in monetary 
transmission in India is on the rise.  
c) Credit Channel  
Bank lending: An increase in money supply leads to an increase in bank deposits 
which enhance bank lending. Increase in bank lending leads to further 
investments; leading in turn to increase in aggregate demand.  
Banks may be reluctant to lend despite the growing cash reserve due to depressed 
economic conditions, and some borrowers should be completely bank dependent 
in order to make this channel of transmission really effective. In countries like 
India, where financial markets are not fully developed as yet, this could be a 
significant channel of transmission. Balance Sheet: An increase in money supply 
raises the prices of the stocks as people invest money in stocks. This reduces the 


--- Page 26 ---
 
260 
 
Issues in  
Monetary Policy drawbacks of asymmetric information which boosts confidence of the lenders 
and borrowers on each other. There is increased lending and thus investments in 
the growing economy which ultimately raises the aggregate demand. 
Cash Flow: An increase in money supply leads to fall in interest rate and increase 
in cash flow in the economy. This again reduces the drawbacks of asymmetric 
information and increased investment and aggregate demand follows.  
Unanticipated Price level: An increase in money supply raises the otherwise 
unexpected rise in price level of stocks in the economy. The drawbacks of 
asymmetric information are reduced with further raises lending, investment and 
aggregate demand.  
Liquidity Effects: An increase in money supply raises the prices of stocks and 
value of other financial assets. This reduces the risk of financial distress further 
leading to increased consumption of consumer durables and hence increased 
overall aggregate demand. 
d) Other Channels  
Wealth effect: An increased money supply raises the price of stock and thus 
raising the wealth of the people. This increased wealth raises consumption and 
aggregate demand.  
Tobin’s Q Effect: 'Q' represents the ratio of the market value of a firm's existing 
shares (share capital) to the replacement cost of the firm's physical assets (thus, 
replacement cost of the share capital).  An increase in the money supply raises 
the price of the stocks and thus raises the ‘Q’ value leading to increased 
investment and aggregate demand.  
Expectations: An increased money supply raises the expectations of increased 
inflation in the economy which enhances present consumption and investment 
leading to increased aggregate demand.  
16.7  LET US SUM UP 
Monetary policy is the macroeconomic policy implemented by the central bank 
of the country in order to regulate credit through its various instruments. The 
credit control measures are classified into quantitative and qualitative. The 
quantitative measures are interest rates, open market operations, reserve 
requirements and liquidity ratio conditions. The qualitative measures are changes 
in margin requirements, rationing of credit and direct action. The transmission of 
monetary policy takes through various channels. These channels include interest 
rate channel, open market channel, credit channel and other channels such as 
expectations, Tobin’s q and wealth effect. Every channel shows that an increased 


--- Page 27 ---
 
261 
 
Conduct of  
Monetary Policy money supply through various channels ultimately increase the aggregate 
demand in the economy. In developed countries the dominant channel of 
transmission is the traditional interest rate channel, whereas in developing 
countries the exchange rate and bank lending channel play a significant role.  
16.8  ANSWERS/ HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
 PROGRESS EXERCISES 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) By monetary policy we mean a deliberate change in the interest rates and 
money supply by the central bank or monetary authority of the country.  
2) The goals and targets of monetary policy are different and ultimately move 
towards the overall objective of economic policy in general. 
Check Your Progress 2  
1) There are two types of credit control measures of monetary policy, namely, 
Quantitative and Qualitative measures. The Quantitative measures are non 
discriminatory in nature and apply to the entire country, while the 
qualitative measures are selective or discriminatory in nature.  
Check Your Progress 3 
1) There are various channels of transmission of monetary policy.  
 
 
 
