--- Page 40 ---
 
 
 
39 
Financial and 
Currency Crises This structure was followed to finance each US citizen's residential house during 
2005-07. This boosted the real estate sector in the US because of the demand for 
input cost housing sector, employment opportunities in the construction sector 
and contributed to the US GDP. However, because of the econom ic cycle and 
massive unemployment in 2007 in the US economy, the real estate bubble burst 
in the US economy.. This default among the borrowers and credit protection 
sellers was so high that Lehman Brothers, one of the pioneer companies in the 
US economy, declared bankruptcy on 15th September 2008. This is because none 
of the stakeholders has ever anticipated that each agency will default at the same 
time. This crisis travelled phenomenally and was declared a global financial 
crisis. However, because of the conservative banking structure and with a 
developing financial market structure, the emerging economies were less affected 
by the global financial crisis..  
12.4.3 How the crisis of 2007 began? 
The first trouble signals were observed in early 2007 when Freddie Home Loan 
Mortgage Corporation FHLMC stated that it would no longer acquire high -risk 
mortgages and that New Century Financial Corporation, a key mortgage lender to 
risky customers, declare d bankruptcy. Another indicator was that the ABX 
indexes, which track the cost of credit default insurance on instruments backed 
by residential mortgages, began to reflect increasing default risk assumptions 
about this time. Most experts agree that the cri sis started in August 2007 when 
short-term funds were significantly removed from previously regarded securities 
markets. This was evidenced by sharp increases in the "haircuts" on repos and 
problems faced by asset -backed commercial paper (ABCP) issuers who  had 
trouble rolling over their outstanding paper. It caused stress in the short -term 
funding markets in the shadow banking system during 2007 was a pervasive 
decline in US house prices, leading to concerns about subprime mortgages. As 
previously mentioned , at the start of 2007, these worries were reflected in the 
ABX index. In the middle of 2007, the credit rating agencies (CRAs) 
downgraded financial instruments backed by assets. Investors were surprised by 
the size of the rating actions in mid -2007 regard ing the quantity of securities 
impacted and the average downgrading.  
Most economists expected falling housing prices would devastate housing 
investment and consumption. Very few had forecasted that a crisis in real estate 
would eventually lead to a mild r ecession. Even fewer economists had said that 
this crisis might be more extensive than we think. They had anticipated that this 
crisis might be the biggest after the Great Depression. 
When the financial crisis hit, we realised that the financial system was  much 
more volatile than we had perceived. Within a few months, many banks and 
financial institutions went bankrupt or were on the verge of bankruptcy. 
Consequently, banks were unable or reluctant to lend because they feared they 
might not get their money back, given the economic situation. Investors were 
unwilling to invest because a lack of confidence in banking led to the failure of 


--- Page 41 ---
 
 
 
40 
International  
Finance financial intermediaries, and credit availability reached an all -time low. As a 
result, the interest rate increased dramati cally due to the liquidity crunch. The 
crisis rapidly spread to the world economy, and many banks went bankrupt. 
Since consumers and firms could not borrow at a very high -interest rate, 
consumer spending and the output level also fell. 
Once the depth of th e crisis was analysed, policymakers rushed to respond with 
financial, monetary, and fiscal policy measures. The central bank adopted a 
monetary policy by reducing the interest rate. The government responded by 
adopting expansionary fiscal policies to reviv e consumer demand to lift the 
economy out of recession. These policies certainly helped to reduce the severity 
of the crisis. 
Over time, the central bank and the government touched on the limitation of the 
fiscal and monetary policies. The interest rates t ouched zero, and we were stuck 
in a "liquidity trap." Now it was the fiscal policy that was left to lift the economy 
out of recession. Still, with excessive expansionary fiscal policy and a significant 
drop in revenues due to lower output, the government h ad already borrowed a 
massive amount from the public. A considerable increase in public debt was 
concerning and worrisome. The government could not do enough because the 
public debt was too high.  
It was 2010 when economic growth turned positive, but the transition to recovery 
was slow. The unemployment rate was high. Although emerging economies have 
also suffered from this crisis, large countries like India and China faced a 
slowdown but not a rece ssion. Massive outflows of funds were seen from these 
countries because investors did not want to take any risks and were pulling the 
resources as much as possible to minimise the loss. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12.2 Chain of the events leading up to the crisis 
Bubble Bursts 
Housing price 
bubble bursts 
Financial Crisis
External Factors 
▪ Growth of Securitization 
▪ Political Factors and 
Fragmented Regulatory 
Structures 
▪ Financial Innovation 
▪ U.S. Monetary Policy 
▪ Global Economic 
Developments 
▪ Misaligned incentives and 
managerial fraud 
Housing Prices 
Bubble in the U.S. 
Housing Prices 
Leverage and Consumption 
High bank and consumer 
leverage and growth in 
consumption 
Risky Lending 
Screening standards 
become lax and 
mortgages get risky 
Liquidity 
Shrinks 
Liquidity crisis 
in Shadow 
Banking 


--- Page 42 ---
 
 
 
41 
Financial and 
Currency Crises 12.5  WORLD'S MOST DEVASTATING FINANCIAL 
CRISES IN HISTORY 
Financial crises have occurred throughout history and often lead to the economic 
tsunamis in the affected economies. Let us have a look at some major crises and 
their spread.  
Table 12.1: Effect of various crisis all over the world 
NAME OF THE 
CRISIS 
CAUSE ORIGIN OF 
THE CRISIS 
  AFFECTED 
COUNTRIES 
THE CREDIT 
CRISIS OF 1772 
This crisis was caused by a climate 
of overconfidence and a time of 
rapid loan expansion by many 
British banks, fueled by the vast 
wealth generated by their colonial 
holdings and trade. 
London Europe 
THE GREAT 
DEPRESSION OF 
1929-39 
It was triggered by the Wall Street 
crash of 1929 and the poor policy 
decisions of the US government. 
United States Whole World 
THE OPEC OIL 
PRICE SHOCK OF 
1973 
Retaliation by OPEC member 
countries against the US for sending 
arms to Israel in Arab -Israeli War 
abruptly halted oil exports to the 
US, and its allies caused significant 
oil shortages. A severe spike in oil 
prices caused an economic 
catastrophe in many wealthy 
nations, including the United States. 
US and 
developed 
countries 
America, 
Europe, South 
Africa, etc. 
THE ASIAN 
CRISIS OF 1997 
A period of optimism brought on by 
speculative capital flows from 
industrialised nations to the Asian 
Tigers led to an overextension of 
credit and an excessive buildup of 
debt in those economies., and the 
Thai government abandoning the 
fixed exchange rate against US 
dollars, citing a lack of foreign 
currency created a wave of panic 
across Asian financial markets. 
Thailand East Asia and 
Thailand trading 
partners 
THE FINANCIAL 
CRISIS OF 2007-08 
It was triggered by the burst of the 
housing bubble in the US, which 
threatened to bankrupt key  financial 
institutions and enterprises. 
United States Whole World 
 
 


--- Page 43 ---
 
 
 
42 
International  
Finance Check Your Progress 1 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Describe the evolution of financial crises. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) How did the Global Financial Crisis of 2007 began? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Briefly discuss the structure and the role of credit derivatives in the subprime 
mortgage crisis.  
 …………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
12.6 THE CURRENCY CRISIS AND ITS EFFECTS 
ON FINANCIAL MARKETS 
A currency crisis occurs when the value of a country's currency sharply declines, 
accompanied by volatile markets and a lack of faith in the country's economy, 
leading to a negative impact on the economy.  As a result, exchange rates become 
highly unstable, and one unit of one currency may no longer be able to buy as 
much as it used to in another currency. Currency crises can occasionally be 
predicted, yet they are often sudden. Many parties can cause a c urrency crisis, 
governments, investors, central banks, or any combination of these actors.  
Contrary to a currency devaluation as part of a trade war, a currency crisis is an 
unintended occurrence that should be avoided. Central banks and governments 
can help stabilise a currency by selling off foreign currency or gold reserves or 
by intervening in forex markets. Historically, crises have arisen when changes in 
investor expectations result in a substantial shift in the value of currencies.  
Currency crises may be linked to other financial crises, such as abrupt halts in 
foreign capital inflows, significant increases in capital outflows, and defaults on 
sovereign debt. A currency crisis is often the symptom, not the cause, of a more 
severe economic downturn. Central banks are the first line of defense to 
safeguard a currency's stability. In a fixed exchange rate system, central banks 
can attempt to maintain the currently fixed exchange rate peg by drawing on the 


--- Page 44 ---
 
 
 
43 
Financial and 
Currency Crises nation's foreign reserves. They can also interve ne in foreign exchange markets 
when a potential currency crisis is present for a floating -rate system. When 
confidence in the stability of an economy is generally declining, investors usually 
try to withdraw money. This is termed as ‘capital flight’. Inves tors convert their 
domestic currency -denominated investments into foreign currency by selling 
them. This worsens the exchange rate, resulting in a currency run, making it 
nearly impossible for the country to finance its capital spending. Currency crisis 
prediction necessitates examining a diverse and complex set of variables. Few 
factors that are linked to recent crises are Current account deficit, The value of 
currencies rose quickly, Investor's uneasiness because of the government's 
measures. 
The Asian Financial Crisis of 1997 is an example of a financial crisis that began 
as a currency crisis when Bangkok delinked the Thai baht from the US dollar; it 
sparked a series of currency devaluations and large-scale capital outflows. 
12.7 CAUSES OF THE FINANCIAL CRISIS OF 2008 
Most economists had forecast the effect of a decline in housing prices would be 
limited to a decrease in aggregate demand and a slowdown in growth. What they 
had not predicted was the impact of declining housing prices on the finan cial 
system. Sooner falling housing prices crashed the financial system as a whole. 
Even though it was centered on Wall Street at its peak, the global financial crisis 
resulted from both the US domestic and international factors. 
12.7.1 US Banking system problem 
Central banking's inability to force commercial banks to look out for the 
borrower's creditworthiness before lending and maintain a high capital ratio and 
low leverage ratio for transparent and robust banking led to the crisis. 
Commercial banks had overextended credit without accessing the borrowers' 
creditworthiness. And government's extensive interference and guarantees for the 
subprime also contributed to this crisis. For efficient and good banking, 
commercial banks need to maintain a good capital  ratio and keep the leverage 
ratio minimum to show that any sudden volatility can be absorbed. But 
commercial banks did precisely the opposite; they did not abide by the minimum 
capital ratio required to maintain as per the financial regulations. If banks had 
maintained the high capital ratio, they wouldn't have made high returns, so they 
ignored the capital ratio, and because of that, the leverage ratio increased sharply. 
Banks probably underestimated the risks they took in good times, just like 
people.  
It all began in the 2000s when interest was meager. Buying a house with a 
mortgage was easy as the mortgage rates were unusually low. The demand for 
housing increased significantly, which pushed up housing prices. Lenders saw it 
as an opportunity to profit and were willing to lend to risky borrowers 
aggressively. And these risky mortgages are known as subprime mortgages.  


--- Page 45 ---
 
 
 
44 
International  
Finance By 2006, 20 per cent of all mortgages were subprime in the US. Most economists 
considered this a positive development. It allowed more peo ple to buy homes by 
thinking that housing prices would continue to rise relative to the house prices 
and they would make a profit. 
In late 2006, when housing prices started to fall, many borrowers found 
themselves in a position where the mortgage value exc eeded the house's value. It 
could be easily seen that the mortgages were much riskier than the lenders had 
assumed, and the borrowers understood. As the housing prices turned around, 
many borrowers started to default, and banks found themselves in a very t ricky 
position where they were making a considerable loss. It created panic among 
investors, borrowers, and lenders. Investors started to sell off their financial 
assets, including securitised mortgages, and even went further by liquidating 
bank deposits. Due to liquidity shortages, even some banks began to go bankrupt. 
This spread had infected the other banks too. Banks were reluctant to lend even 
though banks were not providing liquidity to banks. The whole financial system 
collapsed.  
12.7.2 Global Imbalances 
Global trade imbalances were also significant contributors to the financial crisis. 
United States current account deficit with the oil-exporting countries and the Asia 
Pacific nations was huge during that period. Especially countries like China, 
Japan, and other East Asian economies had a huge trade surplus with the United 
States. It was not that the only United States was going through a trade deficit, 
but countries like Australia and New Zealand too had a considerable trade deficit. 
China was the ma jor manufacturing hub and a favorite destination for investors 
that helped China accumulate huge dollars reserve arising out of trade surplus 
and the foreign direct investment inflows. It all was facilitated by China 
following an undervalued and tightly pe gged exchange rate. It assisted the 
People's Bank of China to accumulate a sizeable foreign currency reserve. Many 
multinational companies invested there, such as Motorola, LG, Nokia, Toshiba, 
etc. China has been growing at a miracle rate of 10 percent for  the last two 
decades. By 2008 People's Bank of China had accumulated a foreign exchange 
reserve of more than $ US 2 trillion, most of which were government treasury 
bonds. China and other Asian countries' export -led growth created a huge current 
account deficit with the developed economies. Asian countries have a huge trade 
surplus with the United States, and not letting the appreciation of exchange rates 
lead to substantial capital outflows from the Asian economies to the US 
economies. And huge capital in flows to the US economy sharply led to a fall in 
interest rates.  
Such low-interest rates made commercial banks consider parking the fund in the 
US housing sector. Growing China and falling interest rates in the US and global 
markets can be easily understood by the global loanable fund's framework. A rise 


--- Page 46 ---
 
 
 
45 
Financial and 
Currency Crises in global saving shifted the saving supply schedule to the right and pushed the 
United States and World interest rates down. 
Extremely low interest rates in the United States incentivised commercial banks 
to invest in housing. They started to lend without doing a risk assessment, which 
led to the housing crisis, and the crisis in the housing crisis caused the financial 
system failure and affected the macroeconomy. 
12.7.3 Growth of Securitization and the OTD model 
It has been asserted that the US government's intention to broaden ownership was 
coupled with monetary policy that allowed banks to have softer lending rules. 
Additionally, the originate -to-distribute (OTD) paradigm of securitisation , a lax 
monetary policy, and weak supervision over bank capital all contribute to this 
softening. Due to these circumstances, commercial banks increased their 
mortgage lending during the time leading up to the crisis, while investment banks 
engaged in warehouse lending via nonbank mortgage lenders. Additionally, there 
is empirical proof that the OTD model incentivised banks to make risky loans in 
ever-increasing numbers.  
12.7.4 Financial Innovation 
For more than two decades before the financial crisis, we saw an explosion of 
financial innovation. Information technology played a role, making it more 
straightforward for banks to create tradable instruments and increasing the 
interconnectedness of commercial banks with the shadow banking system and 
financial m arkets. But apart from information technology, there had to be 
economic incentives for banks to innovate. Financial markets are incredibly 
competitive, making it challenging for institutions to have significant profit 
margins with standard financial produc ts—those whose payout distributions 
everyone agrees upon. This promotes the hunt for new financial products, 
particularly ones with contested creditworthiness. The absence of agreement on 
the investment value of new financial products reduces competition i n that 
market. It enables the institutions supplying those products to make significant 
initial profits. But since these new items don't have a history, they are also risky. 
The explanation is that there is a lack of historical data that can be relied upon  to 
resolve the conflict, which means that not only rivals but also financiers of the 
institutions offering these goods may disagree if they are investments worth 
making. When this occurs, short -term funding for innovative institutions is not 
rolled over, resulting in a funding crisis. Before the crisis, the explosion of new 
asset-backed securities created by securitisation created an ideal environment for 
this. 
12.7.5 US Monetary Policy 
Taylor (2009) argues that the price boom and subsequent crash that preceded the 
crisis greatly influenced the US Federal Reserve's easy -money monetary policy, 


--- Page 47 ---
 
 
 
46 
International  
Finance particularly in the six or seven years before the crisis. He provides evidence that, 
between 2007  and 2009, monetary policy was too "loose fitting" in that actual 
interest rate decisions were significantly lower than what historical experience 
would indicate should be the basis for policy under the Taylor rule. Taylor (2009) 
demonstrates how the Feder al Reserve's deliberate monetary policy choice, 
which included these abnormally low-interest rates, fueled the housing boom and 
ultimately caused the housing crisis. The study uses regression to calculate the 
empirical relationship between interest rates a nd housing starts. The results 
demonstrate a robust positive correlation between the intertemporal decrease in 
interest rates between 2001 and 2007 and the housing market boom. The impact 
of low-interest rates on housing prices was amplified by the incenti ves provided 
by the low-interest rate environment for lenders to make riskier loans. When the 
central bank keeps interest rates on loans low for an extended period, it reduces 
banks' net interest margins, and one way for banks to respond is to increase the se 
margins by taking on more risk. This led banks to expand the borrower pool by 
lending high -risk borrowers who had previously been excluded, further fueling 
the housing price boom. 
12.7.6 Political Factors 
Rajan (2010) argues that structural flaws in the  educational system that resulted 
in unequal access for diverse societal sectors are to blame for the widening 
economic inequality in the United States. Politicians from both parties saw the 
expansion of home ownership to deal with this growing wealth ineq uality—a 
political proclivity that dates back at least to the 19th century Homestead Act and 
therefore adopted legislative initiatives and other inducements to force banks to 
extend mortgage loans to a wider borrower base by relaxing underwriting 
standards, which resulted in riskier mortgage lending. The elevated demand for 
houses pushed house prices and led to the housing price bubble.  
12.8 THE EFFECTS OF THE CRISIS ON THE 
MACROECONOMY 
The financial crisis immediately affected the macroeconomy two folds. First, the 
interest rate , at which firms and people could borrow rose a lot. Usually, firms 
with AAA ratings borrow at a rate close to the government because the AAA 
rating is considere d safest, and bonds with BBB ratings borrow at a higher 
interest rate. Still, the difference is slight, which is close to 1%. The difference in 
borrowing rates between the government bonds and the AAA and BBB bonds 
increased significantly in 2008. Borrowin g rates on the government remained 
very low, whereas the borrowing rate on the AAA and BBB were high. This 
jump in interest rate made it difficult for the firms to borrow fund. It also became 
difficult for ordinary people to get a loan because loan default  damaged their 
credit score, and banks were no longer willing to take risks. 


--- Page 48 ---
 
 
 
47 
Financial and 
Currency Crises Second, the September 2008 financial crisis triggered confusion among 
consumers and firms. People were confused and anxious about future events and 
were speculating about another Great Depression. This anxiety among the 
consumers and the firms led to a drop in confidence. Lower consumer confidence 
led to lower housing and stock prices, which resulted in a sharp decrease in 
aggregate demand. The real -world implications of this finan cial crisis were 
substantial. These included weaker household loan demand and supply, lower 
corporate investment, and more unemployment. 
12.8.1 Credit Demand Effects 
When the housing bubble burst, it jolted household balance sheets, eroding the 
net worth of households. As a result, the highly leveraged households cut back on 
their consumption. However, because of various economic frictions related to 
nominal price rigidities and a lower bound of zero on nominal interest rates, 
relatively unlevered household s did not increase consumption to offset this 
decline.  
The consumption fell sharply in places with higher reliance on home as a source 
of wealth and in high -leverage counties with more considerable house price 
reductions. Consequently, consumer spending and credit demand also decreased. 
12.8.2 Credit Supply Effects 
There is persuasive empirical evidence that the crisis prompted a considerable 
decrease in the amount of credit banks were willing to extend. One indication is 
the drop in syndicated loans durin g the crisis, which is significant because 
syndicated lending is an essential source of credit for the corporate sector. In 
addition to banks, institutional investors, hedge funds, mutual funds, insurance 
companies, and pension funds are also included in t he syndicated loan market. 
The syndicated lending started to decline in the middle of 2007 and accelerated in 
September 2008. An increase in the cost of credit accompanied the decline in 
lending volume. 
12.8.3 Reduction in Corporate Investment and Increase in 
Unemployment 
It is not unexpected that corporate investment declined and unemployment rose 
due to a decline in consumer consumption and a rise in the cost and scarcity of 
credit. In 2008 and 2009, about nine million jobs were lost in the United States,  
accounting for around 6% of the workforce as the country descended into a deep 
recession. Additionally, it prevented many from attempting to return to 
employment after the crisis subsided, which caused the labour participation rate 
to plummet. This had th e effect of making subsequent calculations of the 
unemployment rate tend to underestimate the actual jobless rate. The recorded 
unemployment rate increased every month from 6.2% in September 2008 to 7.6% 
in January 2009. By mid-2009, the average housing price in the United States had 


--- Page 49 ---
 
 
 
48 
International  
Finance decreased by 30%, and the value of stocks had been reduced by almost 50%. The 
American auto sector also took significant damage. October 2008 car sales were 
down 31.9% from September 2008 figures. A causal link between the redu ction 
in credit supply during the crisis and an increase in unemployment. Evidence 
shows that household access to bank loans tended to matter more than firm 
access in determining the decline in employment in the manufacturing sector. 
Still, there was also a significant impact from decreased access to commercial 
and industrial loans and consumer instalment loans. 
12.9 INITIAL POLICY RESPONSE  
12.9.1 Monetary policy 
The central bank went for overall facilitated liquidity to the financial system to 
contain the damage. Given the uncertainty, federal deposit insurance was created 
to prevent confused depositors from rushing to withdraw the deposits. During the 
crisis, if the investors wanted to take their funds back, the banks had no choice 
but to sell some of the assets; even sometimes, the bank had to sell at a fire rate, 
and in the worst scenario, banks went bankrupt. To prevent this, the central bank 
incorporated several liquidity facilities to meet the bank's short -term fund needs. 
It allowed the banks to borrow from the major banks. Financial institutions were 
permitted to use collateral to borrow from the fed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 12.3: Federal Reserve Interventions 
The central banks' facilities provide much -needed liquidity to the financial 
system. The central banks implemented an expansionary Monetary policy to 
lower the interest rates so consumers and firms could easily access much -needed 
liquidity. The monetary au thority started to restructure the bank's bad debts, so a 
Federal Reserve 
Interventions 
Provision of 
liquidity directly to 
borrowers and 
investors in key 
credit markets 
Initiatives designed 
to address 
counterparty risk 
 
Traditional role of 
central bank as lender 
of last resort: 
provision of short-
term liquidity to 
banks and other 
financial institutions 
Expansions of 
open market 
operations to 
support 
functioning of 


--- Page 50 ---
 
 
 
49 
Financial and 
Currency Crises good bank balance sheet brings investors' confidence into the system. During last 
months of 2009, interest rates reached near zero, and interest rates could not go 
down anymore. We are stuck in a liquidity trap. 
12.9.2 Fiscal policy 
Initially, the government introduced the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), 
which mainly focused on cleaning up the banks. This program's initial target was 
4700 billion and was introduced in October 2008. The primary purpose of TARP 
was to remove the bad assets from the bank's balance sheets, thus reducing 
uncertainty, reassuring the investors, and making the banks' balance sheets 
healthier. Accessing the value of impaired assets was extremely tough and time -
consuming; they realised it and abandoned the original goal. The new goal was to 
increase the banks' capital and reduce the leverage ratio. The government started 
to acquire the bank's shares and provide funds to most of the largest banks to 
avoid the banks going bankrupt. 
Once the adverse shock of the crisis became apparent, the US government 
adopted an aggressive expansionary fiscal policy. The government reduced taxes 
and increased spending. After assuming office, the Obama administration 
prioritised a fiscal program that would increase the demand and reduce the size of 
the recession. The name of that fiscal program was American Recovery and 
Reinvestment Act, passed in February 2009. This fiscal program package was 
$780 billion in the form of both tax reduction and  spending. The government 
aggressive expansionary fiscal policy caused a large US budget deficit. The 
deficit increased from 1.7% of GDP in 2007 to 9% in 2010. 
Despite the extensive use of a combination of monetary and fiscal policy, output 
decreased vastly. The economy recovered, but the recovery was slow. 
Check Your Progress 2 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Enlist the causes behind the global financial crisis of 2008. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Explain the macroeconomic effects of the global financial crisis. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
