--- Page 12 ---
 
 
 
11 
International 
Financial Markets 
and Instruments 
 
 
 
 
BLOCK 5 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Unit 11 International Financial Markets and Instruments    
Unit 12 Financial and Currency Crises 


--- Page 13 ---
 
 
 
12 
International  
Finance BLOCK INTRODUCTION 
This block is on “ INTERNATIONAL FINANCE ”. It has two units i.e.,  
Unit 11 - International Financial Markets and Instruments  and Unit 12 - Financial and 
Currency Crises.  
Unit 11 provides an idea of globalization of financial markets and then presents the concept 
of International financial marke ts. The financial instruments available in the international 
financial markets are also discussed. The learner also learns about the types and importance 
of international financial markets. Various instruments (financial as well as debt instruments) 
which help smooth functioning of the international financial markets are also highlighted. 
Unit 12 provides an understanding of global financial crisis of the year 2008. To understand 
this crisis better, some of the most devastating financial crises in history a re also presented 
which will add to the understanding of the unfolding of the 2008 crisis. It becomes imperative 
for the learner to understand the impact and effect of such a global crisis on the 
macroeconomy. The unit completes by presenting the initial p olicy responses in terms of 
monetary and fiscal policies, to combat this global crisis.  
 
 
 
 
 
  


--- Page 14 ---
 
 
 
13 
International 
Financial Markets 
and Instruments 
UNIT 11  INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL MARKETS 
AND INSTRUMENTS  
Structure 
11.0 Objectives 
11.1 Introduction 
11.2 Globalisation of Financial Markets 
11.3 Concept of International Financial Markets 
 11.3.1 Concept of International Financial Instruments 
11.4 Types of International Financial Markets 
11.5 Importance of International Financial Markets and Instruments 
11.6 Instruments of International Financial Markets 
11.6.1 Financial Instruments 
11.6.2 International Debt Instruments 
11.7 Foreign Exchange Exposure/Risk  
11.8 Let Us Sum Up  
11.9 Key Words 
11.10 Some Useful references 
11.11 Answer/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
11.0  OBJECTIVES 
After studying this Unit, you should be able to:  
• Explain the concepts of International Financial Markets and Instruments; 
• Indicate the importance of International Financial Markets; 
• Identify the participants in International Financial Markets; 
• Distinguish between various instruments of International Financial Markets; 
• Describe various International Financial Instruments used for raising finance ; 
and 
• Analyse different types of foreign exchange risk. 
 
 Contributed by  Dr. Surendra Kumar, PGDAV College, Delhi University  


--- Page 15 ---
 
 
 
14 
International  
Finance 11.1   INTRODUCTION 
Even the most cursory glance at the international economic trends since the 
1980s shows revolutionary changes in world financial markets. The interaction of 
several factors has produced huge capital flows across national boundaries. 
Along with this, the structure and operation of global financial markets have been 
transformed. 
Financial markets describe where buyers and sellers participate in the trade of 
assets such as equities, bonds, currencies and derivatives. In such markets, 
companies get capita l to expand, as in the stock or bond markets, or hedge their 
risks, like the foreign exchange or commodities markets.  
The immense growth and spread of international financial markets and because 
of their ups and downs affect the lives of people not only d uring times of crisis 
but also daily. With globalization, deregulation, liberalization, financial and 
technological innovation, the volume of financial transactions increased to 
astronomical figures.  
The financial market is a highly complex system in which rules, individuals and 
institutions interact. This complexity increases even more in time and space, 
particularly in the case of international financial markets. This phenomenon is so 
pervasive that it created great interest among people in finance and fluctuations 
in financial markets. 
Because of substantial international capital movements, policies and 
developments in other countries increasingly influence domestic economic 
performance. With this backdrop, this unit is devoted to the discussion of 
globalization of financial markets, concepts, functions and importance of 
international financial markets, instruments used for raising finance from various 
entities, and their description and analysis of foreign exchange risks.  
11.2  GLOBALISATION OF FINANCIAL MARKETS 
In the contemporary world, there has been globalisation of financial markets. In a 
global financial market, technological advances in payment, settlement and 
trading systems an d financial information systems can be made instantaneously 
available to all market participants. In financial markets, globalisation opens 
access to borrowing, lending and investing worldwide. In addition, it plays a 
central role in disciplining policies.  This trend is very much evident from the 
following development (Otmar, 2000): 
i) There has been a steady increase in cross -border financial flows around the 
world. Because various banks and institutional investors have expanded their 
activities geographically. In this process, they acted as intermediaries to 
channel funds from lenders to borrowers across national borders.  


--- Page 16 ---
 
 
 
15 
International 
Financial Markets 
and Instruments 
ii) The mature securities markets have gained cross -border orientation as they 
design and offer securities which attract international investors. 
iii) Since the 1980s , most countries have been following the policy of 
liberalization, which led to the progressive dismantling of controls on cross -
border financial flows. 
iv) Throughout the world, borrowers and lenders find a wide range of funds 
available for financing deficits and managing surpluses. 
v) Both technological advances and fina ncial innovations are important 
contributing factors as information systems have become able to compute and 
store huge amount of data more rapidly. 
vi) More reliable data exchange protocols have made it possible to connect 
computing machines in more efficient ways. This development facilitated 
cross-border financial deals both easier and more secure. Besides, it removes 
the distance problem created by geography or other factors.  
vii) There has been innovation of financial instruments like "derivative" which 
has mad e it possible for borrowers and lenders to customise their risk 
exposures as well as adjust them over time. This is particularly important for 
international financial markets where information asymmetries exist. 
Globalisation is a process that is not yet f inalised and will lead to a world in 
which countries and economic areas become increasingly interdependent. As 
such, Otmar (2000) remarked that “the globalisation of financial markets is better 
seen as a process rather than as a fixed state of affairs”. It  is also important to 
note that global financial markets are not free from crises as is evident from 1997 
East Asian crises, US crisis of 2008 etc. There have been numerous occurrences 
of financial crises. Some of these financial crises exerted disruptive and 
protracted effects on the economy locally and globally. As a result, economic 
policymakers and market participants have devoted considerable attention to the 
issue of how best to avoid financial crises. 
Similarly, very limited room for maneuver is avai lable for economic policy 
pursuing specific objectives at the national level. This calls for overhauling the 
architecture of the international financial system.  
11.3  CONCEPT OF INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL 
MARKETS 
The international financial markets consist of sources of finance and uses for 
finance in several different countries.  Each of these is a capital market on its 
own. The international financial market s are markets where different entities 
(individuals, financial and non-financial institutions) buy and sell foreign assets 
and assets are traded between agents in surplus and agents in de ficit. The 
financial market comprises the markets  for stock market, bond market, currency 


--- Page 17 ---
 
 
 
16 
International  
Finance market, derivatives market, commodity market and money market . International 
institutions lay down rules for the conduct of financial markets. 
Borrowers/Issuers, Lenders/Investors and Intermediaries are the major players of 
the international markets. Borrowers/Issuers are corporates, banks, financial 
institutions, governm ent and quasigovernment bodies and supranational 
organizations, which need Forex funds for various reasons. The institutions 
which work in financial markets have different aims and functions like Central 
Banks and Ministries of Economy and Finance of different countries.  
The dynamism and depth of the foreign exchange market depend on the 
behaviour pattern of the players.  Modern technology has provided full 
information to players and how they decipher the market information and use; 
their response determines the course of market movement. 
Financial market does not refer to a physical location. Market participants are 
linked by formal trading rules and communication networks for originating and 
trading financial securities link market participants. In an env ironment of 
deregulated and liberalized financial markets, international capital movements 
have been driven mainly by economic fundamentals. The macroeconomic 
conditions of various countries and their trade, monetary and fiscal policies are 
important varia nts. Interactions among markets have been facilitated by 
technological innovations, which provided market participants with opportunities 
to diversify, hedge, and increase profits on their investments, thereby promoting 
the use of new financial products and instruments. 
Features of International Financial Markets : Let us consider some of the 
important foreign exchange market features. They are as under: 
i) In a business setting, there is a fundamental difference between making a 
payment in the domestic market and making a payment abroad.  In a 
domestic transaction, companies use only one currency.  In a foreign 
transaction, companies can use two or more currencies. 
ii) This market is the largest asset class in the world because of its enormous 
volume of trading, representing high liquidity. 
iii) It spans over a large geographical area. 
iv) It is around the clock markets as it has continuous operation: 24 hours a day 
throughout the week (Monday to Friday at each centre). i.e., trading from 
22:00 GMT on Sunday (Sydney) until 22:00 GMT Friday (New York).  
v) The variety of factors is responsible for fluctuations in exchange rates. 
vi) As compared to other financial markets of fixed income instruments, this 
market operates on the low margins of relative profit. 
vii) Important foreign exchange trading centers are located in Hong Kong, 
Singapore, Paris and Frankfurt, amongst others, while the biggest three are 
New York, Tokyo and London, of which London is the largest. 


--- Page 18 ---
 
 
 
17 
International 
Financial Markets 
and Instruments 
Cross-border transactions occur through an exchange of curren cies between 
buyers and sellers. The tendency of each country to prefer to use its own unique 
currency complicates international business transactions. There are around 175 
currencies in use around the world. International business would be impossible 
without foreign exchange and the foreign exchange market. The foreign 
exchange market refers to the organizational setting within which businesses, 
governments, and banks buy and sell foreign currencies and other debt 
instruments.  Only a small fraction of dai ly transactions in foreign exchange 
actually involve the trading of currency. Most foreign -exchange transactions 
involve the transfer of electronic balances between commercial banks or foreign 
exchange dealers. The foreign exchange market has two major seg ments: the 
over-the-counter market (OTC) and the exchange -traded market. The OTC 
market is composed of commercial banks, investment banks and other financial 
institutions.  The exchange-traded markets are composed of securities exchanges, 
such as London In ternational Financial Futures and Options Exchange (LIFFE), 
where certain types of foreign -exchange instruments, such as exchange -traded 
futures and options, are traded. 
The foreign exchange market serves two main functions:  
i) To convert the currency of one country into the currency of another.   
ii) To provide some insurance against foreign exchange risk, which means the 
adverse consequences of unpredictable changes in exchange rates. 
A given foreign-exchange market operates at three levels:  
i) in transactions between commercial banks and their commercial customers, 
who are the ultimate demanders and suppliers of foreign exchange;  
ii) in the domestic interbank market conducted through brokers; and  
iii) in active trading in foreign exchange with banks overseas. 
These foreign exchange markets are very important for international businesses. 
There are four main uses of foreign exchange markets in that sense: 
i) The payments a company receives for its e xports, the income it receives from 
foreign investments or the income it receives from licensing agreements with 
foreign firms may be in foreign currencies. 
ii) Businesses use foreign exchange markets when they are required to pay a 
foreign company for its products or services in its country’s currency.   
iii) When businesses have spare cash that they wish to invest for short terms in 
money markets.   
iv) Currency speculation is another use of foreign exchange markets.  Currency 
speculation typically involves the short -term movement of funds from one 
currency to another in the hopes of profiting from shifts in exchange rates. 


--- Page 19 ---
 
 
 
18 
International  
Finance In this market currencies of various countries are bought and sold against each 
other. This is also called foreign currency market where an over-the-counter trade 
takes place. This market has two wings wholesale market and retail market. In 
retail market travelers and tourists exchange one currency for another in the form 
of currency notes or travelers’ cheques. 
11.3.1 Concept of International Financial Instruments 
Foreign exchange instruments are financial instruments that are represented on 
the foreign market. It is a real or virtual document representing a legal agreement 
involving some sort of monetary value. Foreign exchange instruments primarily  
consist of currency agreements and derivatives. Financial instruments can be 
generally classified as: 
i) Equity based, representing ownership of the asset, 
ii) Debt based, representing a loan made by an investor, to the owner of the 
asset, and 
iii) Foreign exchange instruments are a unique type of instrument 
Different subcategories of each instrument type exist. Financial instruments can 
be considered as easily tradable packages of capital, each having unique 
characteristics and structure. The wide array of financial instruments in the 
contemporary marketplace allows for the efficient flow of capital amongst the 
world's investors. Any financial instrument has three major functions: 
i) Financial instruments act as a means of payment 
ii) Financial instruments act as stores of value. They generate increases in 
wealth that are larger than from holding money and can be used to transfer 
purchasing power into the future. 
iii) Financial instruments allow for the transfer of risk. Futures and insurance 
contracts enable a person t o transfer risk to another. Information about 
financial instruments is important to users, as it provides insight into the risks 
related to financial assets and financial liabilities, including the exposure to 
risks arising from these to the entity and how they are managed.  
Check Your Progress 1 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Write about globalization of financial markets in around 100 words. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
