--- Page 30 ---
 
 
 
29 
International 
Financial Markets 
and Instruments 
11.8  LET US SUM UP 
In this unit, we discussed about foreign exchange market and international 
financial market instruments. Foreign exchange market refers to instruments 
denominated in foreign currencies with a maturity of different periods from one 
day to more than a year. The foreign exchange market is dominated by many 
central banks, commercial banks, other financial institutions, and nonfinancial 
institutions, such as corporations and governments. All these are players in the 
foreign-exchange market. The foreign -exchange market is divided into the over -
the-counter market (OTC) and the exchange -traded market. Foreign exchange is 
money denominated in another nation's currency or group of nations. The 
exchange rate is the price of a currency. Companies use foreign exchange to  
settle transactions involving the imports and exports of goods and services, for 
foreign investments, and to earn money through arbitrage or speculation. 
International financial markets and operations comprise buying and selling 
currencies, deposit taking  and lending and issuance of securities. Market 
segments are classified according to the nature of financial operations. Money 
markets deal with exchange or exchange -related transaction, credit markets deals 
with deposit taking and lending. Capital markets  and equity markets are 
concerned with issuance of securities and issuance of international equities 
respectively. 
An option is the right, but not the obligation, to trade foreign currency in the 
future. Options can be traded OTC or on an exchange. A foreign currency future 
is an exchange-traded instrument that guarantees a future price for the trading of 
foreign exchange, but the contracts are for a specific amount and specific 
maturity date. 
Euro market transactions are financial transact ions denominated with currency 
outside the country of its origin. Euro markets consist of Eurobanks that offer 
wholesale deposits and loans in favourable jurisdiction and in a variety of 
currencies other than that of the country where the banks are situated. These Euro 
banks are entirely free of market regulatory controls. Euro market operations 
have been medium to long -term lending with floating interest rates. Indian 
companies have been raising funds from international financial markets by 
issuing Euro bo nds, Euro -convertible bonds and Euro equities. ‘Global 
Depository Receipts (GDRs) are used to tap multiple markets using a single 
instrument. 
Risk is widespread in financial markets. The risk in international financial 
markets is greater than domestic mark ets. Various kinds of risk are involved in 
international financial transactions. Such risks are generally categorised into 
three: transaction risk, translation risk, and economic risk. 


--- Page 31 ---
 
 
 
30 
International  
Finance 11.9  KEY WORDS 
Euro banks  The banks which accept deposits and make 
loan in foreign currencies. 
Euro bonds A bond placed in the countries other than 
those in whose currency it is denominated. 
Euro-Commercial Papers These are short -term promissory notes 
issued on an unsecured basis by commercial 
and financial institutes. 
Euro dollar Dollar deposited in a bank outside its 
country of origin.  
Euro market Transactions in Eurodollar, Euroyen etc.  
Foreign Bond The bond sold outside the borrower's 
country and is denominated in the currency 
of the country of issue. 
LIMEAN The average of LIBID and LIBOR. 
London-Interbank Offered rate 
(LIBOR) 
The rate at which funds are offered to a 
London or by a London bank to another 
London Bank. 
11.10 SOME USEFUL REFERENCES 
Assonebb (AEB) (2009). INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL MARKET 
(ENCYCLOPEDIA), https://www.bankpedia.org/termine.php?c_id=23258 
Bank for International settlements (2022, March 15). Triennial Central Bank 
Survey of Foreign Exchange and OTC Derivatives Markets Reporting guid elines 
for turnover in April 2022,  
Monetary and Economic Department, https://www.bis.org/statistics/triennialrep/  
2022survey_guidelinesturnover.pdf 
Hill, Charles W L and Jain, Arun K (2009). International Business, Sixth Edition, 
Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi 
Investor Tonight (2021, November 21). What is International Financial Markets? 
Instruments, https://investortonight.com/blog/international-financial-markets/ 
Issing, Otmar (2000, September 12). The globalisation  of financial markets, 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2000/html/sp000912_2.en.html#:~:text
=In%20financial%20markets%2C%20the%20process,central%20role%20in%20
disciplining%20policies. 
Joshi, Rakesh Mohan (2009). International Business, Oxford Unive rsity Press, 
New Delhi 


--- Page 32 ---
 
 
 
31 
International 
Financial Markets 
and Instruments 
Kester, Y. Anne (1995).Following the Money: U.S. Finance in the World 
Economy, National Academies Press , Washington, DC,https://www.nap.edu/  
read/2134/chapter/3 
Koveos, Peter E. and Philippatos, George C. (2021). International Financ ial 
Markets, Cognella Academic Publishing, San Diego, CA, USA 
Nandi, Sukumar (2014). Economics of the International Financial System, 
Routledge India, New Delhi 
Prakash, Abhinav (2013, August 19). Overview of the International Financial 
Instruments Issued from Ma laysia, NationalLaw University, Jodhpur (NLUJ), 
SSRN, https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2311988 
Ramachandran, Abhilash and Vaidya, Dheeraj (n d). Economic Risk, Wall Street 
Mojo,https://www.wallstreetmojo.com/economic-risk. 
11.11 ANSWERS/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES  
Check Your Progress 1 
1) See section 11.2 
2) See section 11.3 
3) See section 11.3.1 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) See section 11.4 
2) See section 11.4 
3) See section 11.5 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) See section 11.6 
2) See section 11.6 
3) See section 11.6 
4) See section 11.7 
5) See section 11.7 
 


--- Page 33 ---
 
 
 
32 
International  
Finance 
UNIT 12  FINANCIAL AND CURRENCY CRISES  
Structure  
12.0  Objectives 
12.1  Introduction 
12.2  Explaining Financial Crisis 
12.3  Global Financial Crisis 2007 
12.4  Unfolding of Global Financial Crisis 
 12.4.1 Structure and the Role of Credit Derivatives 
 12.4.2 Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities and the bubble burst 
 12.4.3 How the crisis of 2007 began? 
12.5  World's most Devastating Financial Crises in History  
12.6  The Currency Crisis and Its Effects on Financial Markets 
12.7  Causes of the Financial Crisis of 2008 
 12.7.1 US Banking system problem 
 12.7.2 Global Imbalances 
 12.7.3 Growth of Securitization and the OTD model 
 12.7.4 Financial Innovation 
 12.7.5 US Monetary Policy 
 12.7.6 Political Factors 
12.8  The Effects of the Crisis on the Macroeconomy 
 12.8.1 Credit Demand Effects 
 12.8.2 Credit Supply Effects 
 12.8.3 Reduction in Corporate Investment and Increase in Unemployment 
12.9  Initial Policy Response 
 12.9.1 Monetary policy 
 12.9.2 Fiscal policy 
12.10  Let Us Sum Up 
12.11  Key Words 
12.12  Some Useful Readings 
12.13  Answer/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
 
 Contributed by  Dr. Alok Mishra, Associate Professor of Economics, Central University of Hyderabad 


--- Page 34 ---
 
 
 
33 
Financial and 
Currency Crises 12.0  OBJECTIVES 
After studying this Unit, you should be able to:  
• explain the reason behind Financial and currency crisis; 
• describe the causes, features, consequences, types, and implications of the 
Global Financial Crisis; 
• analyse the structure and organisation of the Credit Derivative products and 
their role in the global financial crisis; and 
• explain the regulatory responses to the Global Financial Crisis. 
12.1   INTRODUCTION 
In this unit, we will understand the phenomenon of financial crisis and its origin. 
You will also get to learn about the way through which the financial crisis affects 
any economy. Afterwards we will discuss the Global financial crisis of the year 
2007 at length by describing its causes, features, consequences, types and 
implications. We also discuss the structure and organisation of Credit Derivative 
products and their role in the global financial cris is. Any financial crisis needs to 
be managed or combatted. To do so there are regulatory responses, which we will 
discuss in detail.  
12.2  EXPLAINING FINANCIAL CRISIS 
Financial System consists of financial markets, financial instruments, and 
financial services. The financial system plays a pivotal role in channelising 
savings from savers to dissavers. The Merriam -Webster dictionary defines a 
crisis as an unstable/crucia l time or situation in which a decisive change is 
impending. A financial crisis is when financial asset prices are nosedived in 
value, firms, businesses, multilateral organisations and consumers cannot pay 
their debts, and financial institutions experience  a shortage in liquidity. A 
financial crisis is often associated with a bank run where savers lose faith in the 
banks because of inadequate deposit insurance. A financial crisis is often 
associated with one or more phenomena: the bursting of a financial bu bble, the 
mortgage crisis, sovereign default, currency crisis, stock market crashes, credit 
crunches, severe disruptions in financial intermediation and the supply of 
external financing to various sectors in the economy, large scale government 
support (in the form of liquidity support and recapitalisation. A financial crisis is 
sometimes limited to a single country or one segment of the financial services but 
is more like to spread regionally or globally. Thus, financial crises are typically 
multidimensional and can be hard to characterise by employing a single 
indicator.  
There are two types of financial crises such as systemic financial crises and non -
systematic financial crises. A  systemic crisis refers to the risk of the breakdown 


--- Page 35 ---
 
 
 
34 
International  
Finance of an entire financial system rather than the failure of one isolated part. It denotes 
the risk of cascading failure in the financial sector caused by the vertical and 
horizontal integration within the financial system, as during the Great Depression 
in the 1930s and the global financial crisis in 2008. As a result, it leads to a 
severe economic downturn. On the contrary, a  non-systemic crisis involves only 
one or a few markets or sectors, like the Savings and Loan Crisis. Apart from 
these, the other forms of financial crises are  currency crises, capital account or 
balance of payment crises, debt crises and bank crises. A financial crisis occurs 
when policymakers and finance ministers ignore indirect warnings given by the 
country's financial market and cannot understand, estimate and forecast the 
associated risk. Deficiency in financial regulations and under supervision brings 
instability to the nation's financial markets. 
Financial crises are age -old problems. The series starts with debt and inflation 
crises in ancient Greece and Rome to banking, debt, and currency crises affecting 
many countries in modern times. Each past crisis is an essential subject for 
policymakers, social scientists and financial practitioners as it teaches a lesson 
about how to handle and prevent future cris es. Learning from past mistakes and 
corrective measures not only reduces the incidence and impact of the financial 
crisis but also enhances understanding of monetary circulations, the impact of 
internal and external shocks, exchange rate regimes, interest rate and macro 
linkages etc. – Irving Fisher, Milton Friedman, John Maynard Keynes, Paul 
Krugman, and John B. Taylor are famous examples. 
The literature associated with the financial crisis opines that  fundamental factors, 
such as macroeconomic imbalances  in terms of shocks in money supply, output, 
prices, wages, interest rates, exchange rates, current account deficits, rising fiscal 
deficits, the balance of payments deficits in terms of volume and receipts of 
exports and imports, financial openness measur es, trade openness indicators, 
foreign investment openness indicators are the potential factors behind the 
financial crisis. Financial crises sometimes arrive by irrational factors such as 
bank runs, contagion and spillovers among financial markets, limits  to arbitrage 
during times of stress, the emergence of asset busts, credit crunches etc.  
Even after the structural economic reforms in many countries, such as the advent 
of globalisation, privatisation, and liberalisation, now the question arises what 
effects do these structural reforms in the financial sector have on economic 
growth and vice versa? If the financial and real sectors are interlinked, why could 
macroeconomists and statisticians not forecast the financial crisis well in 
advance? Joseph Schumpeter (1911) was perhaps the first economist to examine 
this nexus. Schumpeter distinguishes between producers and entrepreneurs, 
where entrepreneurs take risks and go for new combinations in the form of 
innovation. In Schumpeter's theory of economic develo pment, this unique 
combination or innovation is the main driver to take the economy from a lower 
level to a higher equilibrium through bank credit. However, in the modern 


--- Page 36 ---
 
 
 
35 
Financial and 
Currency Crises banking system, bank credit severely suffers because of a lack of regulatory 
control and a deposit insurance scheme to protect the banking system. The gross 
mismatch between short -term saving liabilities of banks for financing long -term 
investments and uncertainties in the financial markets leads to panic in the bank 
customers and bank runs. 
Different schools of thought have multiple perspectives on the role of finance in 
economic growth. But it is widely accepted in the literature that the financial 
system plays a pivotal role in facilitating savings in terms of investment and 
contributing towards growth. However, this is subject to regulatory control and 
market discipline.  
12.3  GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS 2007 
The global financial crisis, which began to manifest itself in July of 2007, 
emerged as a liquidity crisis, which can be traced back to the US subprime 
housing market. When interest rates for loans rose between 2004 and 2006, and 
the prices of houses began  to decline in 2007, failures in the repayment of 
subprime mortgage loans, as well as failures in the repayment of subprime 
mortgage-backed debts and other securities, heavily increased. Major financial 
institutions that had borrowed or invested in mortgag e-backed securities of non -
depository finance companies were forced to declare bankruptcy or were taken 
over by other banks. The emergence of the global financial crisis was also the 
result of the doubtful use of high -risk off -balance sheet instruments wit h zero 
liquidity and uncertain value on the side of non -depository financial institutions. 
Mortgage-backed securities and collateralised debt obligations (CDO),  traded by 
commercial banks  to distribute credit risk,  which turned out to be illiquid for 
most of the part, heavily accelerated in the year before the financial crisis 
surfaced.  
By contagion, the housing market downturn and subsequent financial market 
crisis have also affected the broader US real economy. Due to the growing 
integration of financial markets and industries during the past 20 years, the crisis 
spread to Europe with dramatic slowdowns occurring across Europe and the 
recession widening into a global problem. Some of the factors that led to the 
financial crisis in the US – high-risk, non-banking mortgage loans, low -interest 
rates, aggressive (subprime) credit expansion, and ignoring of the credit risks of 
borrowers – created similar problems in Europe.  
The US crisis affected almost every part of the world in the new, globalised 
world o f closely interdependent economies. The global financial crisis 
highlighted the complex international linkages between financial markets and 
between the US and European economies.  


--- Page 37 ---
 
 
 
36 
International  
Finance 12.4  UNFOLDING OF THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL 
CRISIS 
The financial crisis in 2007  was a non -systemic crisis linked to  subprime 
mortgages or risky loans to homeowners. The US subprime mortgage market 
delivered a significant shock to the existing architecture for financial services 
regulation and supervision worldwide. The foundation of the global financial 
crisis was the housing market bubble which was the result of a political mandate 
in the US wherein each homeless US citizen was to be provided with a house. 
The US Federal Reserve bank of St. Louis instructed all the commercial banks i n 
the US territory to provide an easy loan to all US borrowers interested in 
financing their housing needs. However, commercial banks found difficulty due 
to the stringent restrictions like asset and income verification of the borrowers 
before sanctioning home loans to them. Historically, banks approve a loan if the 
value of the asset possessions is sufficiently higher than the value of the liabilities 
the borrowers asked for. Hence, potential homebuyers found it difficult to obtain 
mortgages if they had be low-average credit histories, provided small down 
payments or sought high -payment loans. Lenders denied such mortgage requests 
unless protected by government insurance or guarantee schemes. 
Nevertheless, with the instructions of the government mandate and the circular 
from the US Federal Reserve Bank, the commercial banks were asked to revise 
their lending rate at a lower rate to make the loan easier for home loan borrowers 
despite their low credit history. This is popularly known as 'Sub Prime Lending 
Based’ home loans. Thus, high -risk mortgages became available from lenders 
who funded mortgages by repackaging them into pools sold to investors in mid 
2003s. 
A set of new financial products was used to appropriate these risks, with private -
level mortgage -backed securities (PMBS) providing most of the funding for 
subprime mortgages. These instruments are called credit derivative instruments, 
financial reengineering products, securitisations, and asset -backed securities. 
Credit derivatives may also be defined as a specific class of financial instruments, 
the value derived from an underlying market value of the reference asset bank 
loan or a portfolio of loans, corporate bonds or other debt instruments, trade 
receivables etc. These instruments are Collateral Bond Obligations, Collateral 
Debt Obligations, Collateral Mortgage Obligations, Credit Default Swaps, Total 
Return Swaps, Credit Linked Notes, Residential Mortgage Based Securities, and 
Commercial Mortgage Based Securities. This enabled more first -time 
homebuyers to obtain mortgages and homeownership rose. In the next section, 
we have described a particular structure of Residential Mortgage Based 
Securities to understand the global financial crisis.  


--- Page 38 ---
 
 
 
37 
Financial and 
Currency Crises 12.4.1 Structure and the Role of Credit Derivatives 
To understand the structure and the role of credit derivatives in the subprime 
mortgage crisis, let's divide the banks into commercial or conventional and 
modern or investment banks. Commercial banks accept deposits from customers 
with non-maturing liabilities to finance the borrowers and investments with long -
term maturities. However, investment banks manage the depositors' wealth on 
their behalf. Credit Derivatives (CDs) are off -balance sheet financial contracts 
that allow the lender to transfer the credi t risk of a financial instrument to a third 
party against the payment of a fee. They are voluminously used in the US 
commercial banking sector. The banks use them to mitigate credit risk exposure 
and expand their credit portfolio. A credit derivative invol ves mainly three 
participants. First, the borrower needs credit (reference entity). Second, the 
lender needs insurance for the loan (protection buyer). Third, the third party or 
the guarantor who wants to profit by covering the risk of a loan default 
(protection seller / Counterparty). There are two types of credit derivatives. They 
are Funded and Unfunded credit derivatives. Unfunded CDs are contingent 
instruments where the protection buyer does not receive any initial payment from 
the protection seller (c ounterparty) for covering the credit risk. Under such an 
agreement, the counterparty pays only when the borrower defaults. The different 
types of unfunded CDs are Credit Default Swaps (CDS), Credit Default Swap 
Options (CDSO), Credit Spread Options (CSO), and Total Rate of return Swaps 
(TRRS). 
On the other hand, funded CDs are instruments where the lender is not exposed 
to credit risk from this counterparty. This is because the counterparty pays the 
lender an appropriate sum to cover any future loan default . The different types of 
funded CDs are Credit Linked Notes (CLNs), Collateral Debt Obligations 
(CDOs), Collateral Mortgage Obligations (CMOS), Collateral Bond Obligations 
(CBOs), Commercial Mortgage -Backed Securities (CMBS), Residential 
Mortgage-Backed Se curities (RMBS) and Constant Proportion Debt Obligation 
(CPDO). 
12.4.2 Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities and the bubble 
burst 
Providing easy loans to the homeless forced all the commercial banks in the US 
territory to disburse the home loan to customers despite their weak 
creditworthiness. The primary incentive before these commercial banks was that 
they generate these home loan portfolios for the next 15 years to 20 years of 
maturity so that they can see the home loan portfolio to investment banks to 
enjoy the time value of the home loan portfolio without exposing to the credit 
risk even though home loan portfolio is risky. This is because any of the 
borrowers can default at any point in time for the next 15 to 20 years on their 
commitment while paying towards the principal and interest rate of their total 
loan value. The investment bank purchases this home loan portfolio and crea tes a 


--- Page 39 ---
 
 
 
38 
International  
Finance trustee to manage this portfolio. On the full value of this credit portfolio, the 
trustee also buys the credit protection in the form of insurance with the condition 
that the protection seller will compensate the amount if any borrower defaults in 
the credit home loan portfolio during the maturity of the loan. In anticipation, the 
trustee pays the regular premium to the credit protection seller during the 
contract's life. These protection sellers are the same investment banks that have 
created the tee s to manage the credit home loan portfolio. The trustee, also 
known as a special purpose entity, has taken some amount as reserve and cash 
account to utilise for the contingency purpose. Based on the remaining amount, 
otherwise known as asset -backed securi ties, the trustee has issued different 
financial instruments such as senior notes, mezzanine notes, junior notes and 
equity tranches to issue to the investors. There is a hierarchy among these notes, 
so senior notes provide less return with low risk compar ed to the mezzanine, 
junior and equity tranches. The equity tranche is highly risky and provides a 
higher return. However, it is difficult to find investors for equity tranches in the 
market; hence, the same investor bank is the investor for equity tranche s. These 
notes are high investment graded by rating agencies such as Standard and Poor, 
Moodys, and Fitch. A typical structure of RMBS is given as follows. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 12.1: Schematic Diagram of Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities 
Entrust 
Hinsei Trust 
B/C 
 
ABC Bank 
Originator/Servicer 
B/C 
Dreams 
Funding 
Mez 
 Senior 
 
Investors 
Servicing 
Back-up 
Servicer 
Daihyaku 
Life 
Daihyaku 
Guarantee 
Indemnity 
Mortgages 
