--- Page 20 ---
 
 
 
19 
International 
Financial Markets 
and Instruments 
2) What are international financial markets? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Explain the concept of international financial instruments.  
 …………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
11.4 TYPES OF INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL 
MARKETS 
The international financial markets have primary and secondary markets dealing 
with issue of new instruments and trading in existing instruments and negotiable 
debt instruments, respectively. International financial markets can develop 
anywhere, provided the local regulations permit the market and that the potential 
users are attracted to it. The most important international financial centres are 
London, Tokyo and New York.  
Volume of Foreign Exchange Market : According to the  Bank for International 
Settlements (BIS), trading in foreign exchange markets averaged $6.6 trillion per 
day in April 2019. This is composed of the following: 
i) $2 trillion in spot transactions 
ii) $1 trillion in outright forwards 
iii) $3.2 trillion in foreign exchange swaps 
iv) $108 billion currency swaps 
v) $294 billion in options and other products 
Source: Investor Tonight (2021) 
There are different types of financial markets . However, market are classified 
according to the nature of financial operations:  
i) money markets (or exchange markets): exchange or exchange related 
transactions, 
ii) credit markets : deposit taking and lending, 
iii) capital markets : issuance of securities, and  
iv) equity markets : issuance of international equities.  
A brief description of these markets is as under:  
International Currency Market : The main participants in international financial 
markets are commercial b anks, pension funds, hedge funds and private equity 
funds. An important aspect of growth has been the emergence of international 


--- Page 21 ---
 
 
 
20 
International  
Finance banking consortia. Since the 1960s various banks started forming international 
syndicates. Multinational banks are participatin g in huge transfers of capital not 
only for investment purposes but also for hedging and speculating against 
exchange rate changes. 
Euro Currency Market: The transactions in Eurodollar, Euroyen, Eurofranc etc. 
are known as 'Euro Currencies Markets'. This market allows for more convenient 
borrowing, which improves the international flow of capital for trade and 
investment between countries and companies. For example, an Indian company 
borrowing U.S. dollars from a bank in Germany is using the Euro market. Th e 
Euro market is a wholesale market (generally restricted to transactions over US $ 
1 million), with participants limited to banks, financial institutions, institutional 
investors, major corporates and high net worth individuals. 
The prefix 'Euro' creates some confusion because it denotes a currency used for 
financial transactions outside the country of origin of that currency. As for 
example, if US dollar is called Eurodollar, it means financial assets and liabilities 
(denominated in dollars) but traded outside the United States. Similarly, Japanese 
yen traded out of Japan is called Euroyen, and Swiss francs traded out of 
Switzerland is called Eurofranc. But after launching of the 'Euro' in 2000 as the 
official currency of European Union, Eurocurrency marke t is the market in the 
currency of the Euroland. Further, it is known as Eurodollar, Euroyen, Eurofrancs 
etc. depending on which particular currency is used for financial transaction 
outside the country of the origin of that currency.  
Euro currency markets consist of banks (Euro banks) that offer wholesale 
deposits and loans in various currencies. Euro banks are commercial banks 
dealing in Euro markets. Euro banks are financial intermediaries that 
simultaneously bid for deposits and make loans in a currenc y or currencies, other 
than that of the country in which they are located. Operations of Euro markets 
have spread over Asia, Europe and the United States.  
Euro currency markets facilitate hedging possibilities for corporate borrowers. 
Euro market is very deep in the short-term market, where 3-6 months deposits are 
most popular. The basic structure in Euro market operations has been medium to 
long term lending on variable (floating) interest rates, with an option to re -set 
(roll over), the interest rate per iodically at 3 or 6 months. The banks take into 
consideration borrowers requirements and have devised various instruments for 
preferred maturity. 
London Inter -bank Bid Rate (LIBID) : This is the rate bid by banks on 
Eurocurrency deposits. 
London Inter-bank Offer Rate (LIBOR): This is the rate of interest at which banks 
borrow funds, in marketable size, from other banks in the London inter -bank 
market. This is the most widely used benchmark or reference rate for short -term 
interest rates. A large v olume of Eurodollar lending involves the London 


--- Page 22 ---
 
 
 
21 
International 
Financial Markets 
and Instruments 
Interbank Offered Rate. The LIBOR rate measures the cost to a bank of raising 
new funds from the market to re -lend. This is the basis of almost all variable (or 
floating) rate lending in the Euro markets.  
When two top -rated banks arrange an interbank transaction, the interest rate 
agreed for a loan and deposit will often be somewhere between the LIBOR and 
the LIBID, and possibly the average of these two rates, referred to as LIMEAN 
as a reference rate for the ir interbank transactions. The LIBOR convention has 
spread in various variations. In all cases the concept attempts to measure a bank's 
cost for a loan. 
11.5 IMPORTANCE OF INTERNATIONAL 
FINANCIAL MARKETS AND INSTRUMENTS 
Operations in financial markets have become highly globalized and their 
importance in contemporary world is evident from the following: 
i) Maintaining stability in international financial markets is not easy as it has 
become very intricate . With easy movement of funds from one count ry to 
another, the prices of financial instruments have become highly volatile. 
Exchange rates, prices of bond and securities are affected by different kind 
of “news” which make expectations very precarious. Exchange rates and 
securities prices interact wi th each other. The degree of interaction differs 
from one situation to another, depending on a variety of circumstances. 
ii) The information revolution has completely changed economic, financial, and 
political conditions around the world because of a constant flow of news 
which result in investors making abrupt changes in their holdings. This has 
brought larger swings making the market vulnerable both in the short and 
medium term in a world of integrated financial markets and enormous 
worldwide liquidity. 
iii) Exchange rates are in a constant flux. Transactions have become 
increasingly complex. 
iv) International financial markets are very well integrated now as there is no 
exchange control which makes freer movement of capital across countries. 
v) Cross-listing of securities in several countries.  
vi) Cross-country hedging and portfolio diversification. 
vii) 24-hour trading in financial instruments at exchanges around the world. 
Automated trading execution systems provide a 24 -hour trading market, 
allowing traders to enter buy and se ll orders that are automatically matched 
according to price and time preferences. 
viii) A shift from banks to nonbank financial intermediaries, such as brokerage 
houses, securities firms, insurance companies, and pension funds.  In such a 
competitive environment, banking activities have also significantly changed. 


--- Page 23 ---
 
 
 
22 
International  
Finance ix) A shift from loans to securities and a rise in the use of foreign financial 
centers. Surge in the use of new financial instruments such as derivative 
products: options, futures, and swaps on interest rat es, foreign currencies, 
stocks, bonds, and commodities.  
Multinational corporations (MNCs) which operate on a global scale need 
worldwide sources of finance to meet their investment needs. To serve MNCs, 
financial institutions have diversified their services such as transactions in 
foreign exchange, money market instruments, and derivative products worldwide. 
These sophisticated financial instruments provide investors an array of 
alternatives for hedging and shifting risks, leading to greater certainty of 
international receipts and payments. Of course, all these services entail costs. 
Given the contemporary environment of volatile exchange rates, interest rates, 
and commodity prices, a large market of different financial instruments exist to 
help international businesses, speculators, and investors. The growth of new 
financial instruments has provided flexibility to portfolio management 
operations. As such, the growth of international financial markets has facilitated 
cross-country flows which contribute to a more efficient allocation of resources.  
Check Your Progress 2 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Enlist different types of international financial markets? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Who are the players in the international financial market? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Highlight the importance of international financial markets and instruments. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
11.6 INSTRUMENTS OF INTERNATIONAL 
FINANCIAL MARKETS 
Funds are raised from the international financial market through the sale of 
securities, such as international equities or Euro equities, Euro bonds, medium -
term and short -term Euro notes and Euro commercial papers. In international 
financial markets all k inds of instruments are denominated in foreign currencies. 
While the choice of raising finance through various instruments is large 


--- Page 24 ---
 
 
 
23 
International 
Financial Markets 
and Instruments 
comprising loans, Euro notes and bond, all markets may not be accessible to all 
borrowers. We will discuss the derivatives a t length. First, let us understand a 
little about Foreign Exchange Markets. 
11.6.1Financial Instruments 
Euro is the currency of Euro land and transaction in the Euro currency are known 
as Euro currency market. These markets thrive as they are outside the control of 
any central bank. Consequently, Euro banks can offer higher yields to depositors 
and fixed rates to borrower which makes Euro markets attractive. The important 
instruments that are used to raise finance are Euro notes, Euro -commercial 
papers, Medium-term Notes, Floating Rate Notes, Euro bonds and Euro-equities.  
Similar to domestic financial market s, international financial markets may be 
divided into money and capital markets. Money markets deal with assets created 
or traded with relatively short maturity. The maturity periods of different 
instruments range from one day to one year. Such instruments are very liquid and 
relatively risk free. Internationally traded instruments  of borrowing and lending 
of funds of short-term nature are: 
i) treasury bills,  
ii) bank certificates of deposits,  
iii) commercial paper,  
iv) bankers’ acceptances, 
v) repurchase agreements, and  
vi) other short-term asset-backed claims.  
From the liquidity angle this market is important for MNC’s operations as they 
get fund on day -to-day basis. Treasury bills make up the bulk of the money 
market instruments.  The Capital mar kets deal with instruments whose maturity 
exceeds one year. 
Derivative Instruments : These financial instruments have values determined 
from underlying assets , such as resources, currency, bonds, stocks, and stock 
indexes. These products are very popular and the value of derivative instruments 
depends on other, more basic, underlying variables. These instruments have been 
developed to meet the needs and prefere nces of different customers, including 
their desire to hedge risks in an environment of fluctuating exchange rates, 
interest rates, stock prices, and commodity prices. Most of the derivatives except 
the interest rate swaps are short term in nature.  
Options and futures  are widespread and traded actively. The five most common 
examples of derivatives instruments are synthetic agreements, forwards, futures, 
options, and swaps. Financial institutions, banks and their corporate clients 
regularly trade in forward  contracts, swaps and different types of options outside 


--- Page 25 ---
 
 
 
24 
International  
Finance exchanges also known as over -the-counter markets. This highlights the fact that 
there is no single marketplace or an organized exchange for this. 
Spot purchase and sale transactions ; The spot foreign  exchange purchase refers 
to the business where the designated outlet buys foreign exchange from 
institutional customers based on the spot exchange rate in the foreign exchange 
purchase and sale market. 
Forward Foreign Exchange Purchase and Sale : The forwa rd foreign exchange 
purchase and sale refers to the business where the customer signs a forward 
foreign exchange purchase and sale agreement with the Bank, specifying the 
foreign exchange currency, amount, terms and exchange rate of a future foreign 
exchange purchase/sale transaction. This is put in place in order to handle the 
foreign exchange purchase and sale of the currency. The amount and exchange 
rate are specified in the agreement at the time provided in the contract. This 
product enables the customer to preserve the asset value and avoid exchange rate 
risks by locking up the future exchange rate at present (i.e., the future cost or 
gains). 
The forward rate is based on the prevailing spot rate plus (or minus) a premium 
(or discount) that is determined  by the interest rate differential on comparable 
securities between the two countries involved. For example, if interest rates in 
Switzerland are higher than those of the United States, the Swiss franc shows a 
forward discount, which means the forward rate  is less than the spot rate. 
Conversely, when Switzerland’s interest rates are lower than those of the United 
States, the Swiss franc shows a forward premium, which means the forward rate 
is higher than the spot rate. 
Call Option Vs Put Option:  A call opti on gives its holder the right but not the 
obligation, to buy the specified amount or quantity of a currency usually against 
the U.S.A at the strike price. On the other hand, a put option give s its holder the 
right to U.S.A. 
Future: A future is a derivative transaction that exchanges derivatives on a 
determined future date at a predetermined exchange rate. 
Interest Rate Swap: An interest rate swap is a derivative agreement between two 
parties that involves swapping interest rates where each party a grees to pay other 
interest rates on their loans in different currencies. 
Certificate of Deposit (CD) : This is a savings certificate generally issued by 
commercial banks on which the bearer gets interest. A CD indicates three things 
(i) a maturity date, (i i) a specified interest rate, and (iii) amount. The amount of 
CD is not fixed and can be issued in any denomination.  
Banker’s Acceptance: This is a short -term credit instruments created by a non -
financial firm and guaranteed by a bank. The important featu re of such 
acceptance is that it is traded at a discount from face value on the secondary 
market. 


--- Page 26 ---
 
 
 
25 
International 
Financial Markets 
and Instruments 
11.6.2International Debt Instruments 
Borrowers are the issuers of debt instruments in the form of Promissory Notes, 
Bonds and Commercial Papers. There are various classes of borrowers (e.g. 
companies, governments and other entities) having diversified needs for funds in 
terms of: 
i) Magnitude of amounts. 
ii) The period for which borrowings are needed. Borrowers may need short term 
or long term funds for capital exp enditure. Governments are known as 
sovereign borrowers who raise long -term debt in the international market to 
finance infrastructure and other developmental needs, etc. 
iii) The currency in which borrowings are to be raised.  
iv) The decision for debt finance depe nds on the costs, borrowing terms and 
covenants imposed by lenders, project size, etc.  
Let us now examine some common debt instruments used for short, medium and 
long term. 
Euro commercial Paper: This is an unsecured, short-term paper issued by a bank 
or corporation for financing accounts receivables and inventories in the 
international money market, denominated in a currency other than the 
corporation’s domestic currency. It is usually issued at a discount reflecting 
prevailing market interest rates. Normally, commercial papers have a maximum 
maturity of 270 days. The most prominent markets for commercial paper are the 
United States, Canada, UK, Japan and Australia. Euro market prominence for US 
$ and Euro commercial paper are more popular in Singapore and the UK. 
Commercial Paper (CP) is marketed either directly by the issuer or through a 
dealer i.e. investment bank. A large majority of issuers market their CP directly. 
In the case of dealer-placed CP, the issuers use the services of a securities firm or 
an investment bank. CPs sold in this way is called dealer paper. Competitive 
pressures have forced reductions in the fee charged by dealers. CPs are issued at 
a discount. In other words, if an inve stor buys a CP with face value of US$ 1 
million , he pays less than the face value, though he receives back on maturity the 
total face value. The difference between the two represents 'interest'. The 
difference between the purchase price and the redemption  amount makes up the 
return to an investor. 
Bonds: Supranational agencies like the World Bank and Asian Development 
Bank raise bonds in the international market. National Governments issue 
government bonds. Municipal or other local authorities issue munici pal bonds, 
while companies issue corporate bonds. Bonds do not have one common interest 
rate. Rates differ in terms of fixed -rate, floating-rate and convertible bonds. The 
World Bank issued the global bonds for the first time in 1989. Since 1992, such 
bonds are being issued also by companies. Presently, there are seven currencies 


--- Page 27 ---
 
 
 
26 
International  
Finance in which such bonds are denominated: the Australian dollar, Canadian dollar, 
Japanese yen, DM, Finnish markka, Swedish krona and Euro. The special 
features of the global bonds are:  
i) They carry high ratings  
ii) They are normally large in size  
iii) They are offered for simultaneous placement in different countries  
iv) They are traded on “home market” basis in different regions. 
International bond market is defined as a market for bonds which are sold 
anywhere in the world but not in the geographical territory of the country of 
currency in which it is denominated. Mostly the funds raised by the borrowers in 
such market consist of foreign currencies i.e., other than the borrowers own 
currency for example, a U.S. company borrowing Euro – Dollars, outside U.S. 
The bonds are generally denominated in amounts of US $ 100,000, $ 500,000 or 
more. These are debt securities, normally having a maturity period of one to 10 
years. The ‘notes’ mature in  less than one year and bonds have maturity up to 10 
years. It is to be noted that often the terms ‘notes’ and ‘bonds’ are used 
interchangeably. 
Equity financing in the International Markets : Compared to debt financing 
instruments, issuance of Euro equitie s stands out as a distinct source of raising 
finance. Through equity issues, the issuing company offers ownership rights as 
distinguished from creditorship rights in the form of debt. In recent times there 
has been increase in cross border equity investmen t. This global trend is evident 
from the behaviour of institutional investors of developed countries’ markets, 
increasing their exposure to equity from emerging markets. Shares of these 
overseas firms are often traded in stock exchanges like New York and L ondon. 
The modus operandi is that such shares of overseas firms are traded indirectly in 
the form of ‘depository receipts’. A depository holds the shares issued by the 
firm in the form of ‘depository receipts’.  
Indian companies have been raising finance through Euro -Bonds and Euro -
Equities and have been floating ADR and GDR. In the case of US markets, this 
type of issue is known as ‘American Depository Receipts (ADRs), while Global 
Depository Receipts (GDRs) is an instrument to raise equity capita l in multiple 
markets outside the issuer’s domestic market through one security - which is 
traded in a foreign stock market. 
11.7  FOREIGN EXCHANGE EXPOSURE/RISK 
It is very common to encounter currency exchange rate movements regularly. 
These unanticipated shifts present risks to the international business because they 
represent unplanned for changes in the value of asset and liabilities. These risks 
are usually categorised into three types: transactions exposure, translation 


--- Page 28 ---
 
 
 
27 
International 
Financial Markets 
and Instruments 
exposure and economic exposure.  These exposures result in positions that are 
either uncovered or covered, that is, hedged. Risk exposures should be 
determined according to several possible degrees of severity of circumstances. 
These risks depend on the nature of the item that is exposed , measurability of the 
exposure and the timing of estimation of exposure. Let us understand various 
types of risks: 
i) Transaction risk  arises from foreign currency denominated transactions 
which an entity is committed to complete. In other words, it arises f rom 
contractual foreign currency, future cash flows, when export prices are fixed 
in foreign currency, or imports invoiced in foreign currencies. The exposure 
is due to currency exchange rate fluctuations between the time the 
commitment is made and the tim e it is payable. There are approaches to 
dealing with eliminating the risk of a transaction exposure or hedging at the 
operations level. 
ii) Translation Risk : Translation Exposure is concerned with the present 
measurement of past events. It arises from the nee d to convert values of 
assets and liabilities denominated in a foreign currency into the domestic 
currency. Suppose a company has a different proportion of assets and 
liabilities denominated in particular currencies. In that case, exchange rate 
movements are likely to have varying effects on the value of these assets and 
liabilities. It is also referred to as accounting exposure. This fact makes the 
measurement of translation exposure dependent on the accounting policies 
followed for the purpose of converti ng the foreign currency values of assets 
and liabilities into the domestic currency.  
“For reducing translation and transaction exposure, a number of tactics can 
help firms minimize their transaction and translation exposure. These tactics 
primarily protec t short -term cash flows from adverse changes in exchange 
rates. In addition to buying forward and using swaps, firms can minimize 
their foreign exchange exposure by leading and lagging payables and 
receivables – paying suppliers and collecting payment from  customers early 
or late depending on expected exchange rate movements. A lead strategy 
involves attempting to collect foreign currency receivables (payments from 
customers) early when a foreign currency is expected to depreciate and 
paying foreign currenc y payables (to suppliers) before they are due when a 
currency is expected to appreciate. A lag strategy involves delaying collection 
of foreign currency receivables if that currency is expected to appreciate and 
delaying payables if the currency is expecte d to depreciate.  Leading and 
lagging involves accelerating payments from weak -currency to strong -
currency countries and delaying inflows from strong -currency to weak -
currency countries”(Hill and Jain, 2009). 
iii) Economic Risk : Economic risk is referred to as the risk exposure of an 
investment made in a foreign country due to changes in the business 


--- Page 29 ---
 
 
 
28 
International  
Finance conditions or adverse effect of  macroeconomic factors  like government 
policies or collapse of the current government and significant swing in the 
exchange rates (Ramachandran and Vaidya, n d).Many factors can cause 
economic risk like sovereign default on its payments, political unrest and 
change in the policies ma de by the government, and unexpected swings in 
exchange rate. Change in inflation, interest rates, import -export duties, and 
taxes also impact the exchange rate. Since this directly impacts 
trade, exchange rates risk seeming to be a significant economic risk. 
Economic exposure is concerned with the long -run effect of changes in 
exchange rates on future prices, sales and costs. This is distinct from 
transaction exposure, which is concerned with the effect of exchange rate 
changes on the individual transactions, cost of which are short -term affairs 
that will be executed within a few weeks or months.  
Although economic risk can be mitigated, it cannot be elimina ted  entirely. 
Economic risk is the most intricate risk to foresee, and hence mitigating or 
formulating plans to control the  risk is a challenging task. The management of 
economic exposure draws on hedging and swap contracts. Hedging activities 
against exchange rate fluctuation will prove worthwhile to mitigate the risk.  
Check Your Progress 3 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  What are the different types of international financial market instruments? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) What do you understand by the Euro – Currency market? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) What is Global Depository Receipt (GDR)? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
4) Explain the concept of financial risk. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
5) What are the types of financial risk? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
