--- Page 51 ---
 
 
 
50 
International  
Finance 3) What are the policy responses initiated by the U S government to combat the 
global financial crisis of 2008. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
12.10  LET US SUM UP 
In this unit we discussed about origin of various financial crises with special 
focus on Global financial Crisis of 2007.  A good institution is a primary 
requirement for the growth of the economy. It includes well -developed, 
transparent, and accountable central banking. It appears that the crisis resulted 
from the interaction of many factors: politics, monetary policy, global  economic 
developments, growth of securitisation, and a fragmented regulatory structure. 
The central bank must actively regulate commercial banks to follow the 
guidelines to maintain the minimum capital ratio and limit the leverage ratio to a 
certain threshold level. It is widely acknowledged that banks will need to operate 
with more significant capital levels to manage bankruptcy risk and reduce the 
chance of repeat crises. The shock observation of the economy depends on how 
well the financial system is de veloped and how transparent and accountable the 
country's central banking is. The global financial crisis made policymakers 
consider the requirement of a tightly monitored financial system and controlled 
commercial banking to avoid future crises. And the p olicymakers should adopt a 
monetary and fiscal policy to reduce the severity of the macro crisis and rescue 
the economy from recession. During the global financial crisis of 2008, the 
policymakers did implement a combination of fiscal and monetary policy, but 
they acted late. Of course, the monetary and fiscal policy had reduced the depth 
of the recession. Still, if the policymakers had acted upon it early, the recession's 
severity could have been minimised. 
In order to recognise the importance of the centr al role of banks in the financial 
crisis and acknowledge the interlinkages of macro and financial sectors of the 
economy to achieve adequate economic growth with financial stability, the 2022 
Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Honor of Alfred Nobel 
awarded to Ben S. Bernanke, Douglas W. Diamond, and Philip H. Dybvig for 
their research on banks and financial crises. Douglas Diamond and Philip Dybvig 
developed theoretical models to explore banks' role in the economy and why they 
are vulnerable to  bank runs. Diamond and Dybvig (1983) presented a theory of 
maturity transformation. They showed that the most efficient arrangement is an 
institution using demand deposits to finance long -term projects. However, this 
arrangement has an inherent vulnerability: bank runs may arise. Bernanke (1983) 
showed that the downturn became so deep and so protracted partly because bank 
failures destroyed valuable banking relationships. The resulting credit supply 
contraction left significant scars on the real economy. 


--- Page 52 ---
 
 
 
51 
Financial and 
Currency Crises 12.11  KEY WORDS 
Collateralised debt obligations 
(CDO) 
A Collateralized Debt Obligation 
(CDO) is a type of derivative contract 
and is a synthetic investment product 
that groups different types of loans to 
offer a single investment product to 
institutional i nvestors. Collateralized 
debt obligation (CDO) clubs various 
loans and derives its value from an 
underlying asset. 
 
Credit derivatives a type of derivative in which the risk 
that a loan will not be repaid is sold to 
a party other than the lender. 
 
Financial Crisis A financial crisis is when financial 
asset prices are nosedived in value, 
firms, businesses, multilateral 
organisations and co nsumers cannot 
pay their debts, and financial 
institutions experience a shortage in 
liquidity. 
 
Liquidity trap A liquidity trap is an adverse economic 
situation that can occur when 
consumers and investors hoard cash 
rather than spending or investing it 
even when interest rates are low. 
Mortgage-backed securities A mortgage-backed security (MBS) is 
a type of asset -backed security (an 
'instrument') which is secured by a 
mortgage or collection of mortgages. 
 
OTD model In the OTD model the originator of a 
loan sells it to third parties through a 
securitisation process.  
 
Securitization Securitization is the process in which 
certain types of assets are pooled so 
that they can be repackaged into 
interest-bearing securities. The interest 
and principal payments from the assets 
are passed through to the purchasers of 
the securities. 
 
Subprime lending A subprime mortgage is generally a 
loan that is meant to be offered to 
prospective borrowers with impaired 
credit records. 
 
 


--- Page 53 ---
 
 
 
52 
International  
Finance 12.12 SOME USEFUL REFERENCES 
Bernanke, B. S. (1983). Irreversibility, uncertainty, and cyclical investment. The 
quarterly journal of economics, 98(1), 85-106. 
Diamond, D. W., & Dybvig, P. H. (1983). Bank runs, deposit insurance, and 
liquidity. Journal of political economy, 91(3), 401-419. 
Rajan, R. (2010). How inequality fueled the crisis. Project Syndicate, 9. 
Taylor, J. B. (2009). The financial crisis and the policy responses: An empirical 
analysis of what went wrong (No. w14631). National Bureau of Economic 
Research. 
12.13 ANSWERS/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES  
Check Your Progress 1 
1) See section 12.2 
2) See section 12.4.3 
3) See section 12.4.1 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) See section 12.7 
2) See section 12.8 
3) See section 12.9  
  


--- Page 54 ---
 
 
 
53 
Financial and 
Currency Crises  
