--- Page 1 ---
MEC - 107
INTERNATIONAL TRADE 
& DEVELOPMENT
Volume - II 


--- Page 2 ---
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL TRADE  
AND DEVELOPMENT 
(Vol. 2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
School of Social Sciences 
Indira Gandhi National Open University 
Maidan Garhi, New Delhi-110068  
MEC-107 


--- Page 3 ---
 
 2 
EXPERT COMMITTEE 
Prof. L.G. Burange 
Professor of International Economics,  
Department of Economics, 
University of Mumbai 
 
Prof. Pravakar Sahoo  
Professor of Economics,  
Institute of Economic Growth  
 
Prof. Prabir De 
Research and Information System for Developing 
Countries (RIS) 
 
Prof. Vijaya Katti 
Professor and Head Economics and Trade Policy,  
IIFT, New Delhi 
Prof. Gopinath Pradhan 
Former Professor of Economics 
IGNOU, New Delhi 
 
Prof. Narayan Prasad 
Professor of Economics 
IGNOU, New Delhi 
 
Prof. K. Barik 
Professor of Economics 
IGNOU, New Delhi  
 
Prof. B.S. Prakash 
Professor of Economics 
IGNOU, New Delhi 
 
Shri Saugato Sen 
Associate Professor of Economics 
IGNOU, New Delhi 
PROGRAMME COORDINATORS 
Prof. Narayan Prasad 
Professor of Economics,  
School of Social Sciences, IGNOU, New Delhi 
Dr. Vijeta Banwari,  
Associate Professor,  
School of Social Sciences, IGNOU, New Delhi 
COURSE COORDINATORS 
Shri Saugato Sen 
Associate Professor,  
Discipline of Economics, 
SOSS, IGNOU, New Delhi 
Dr. Vijeta Banwari,  
Associate Professor,  
Discipline of Economics, 
SOSS, IGNOU, New Delhi 
Dr. Nidhi Tewathia 
Assistant Professor,  
Discipline of Economics, 
SOSS, IGNOU, New Delhi 
COURSE EDITOR UNIT EDITORS (Content, formatting and language) 
Dr. Debashis Acharya, Shri Saugato Sen Unit 1, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 
Professor, School of Economics, Dr. Vijeta Banwari Unit 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 15, 18, 19 
University of Hyderabad Dr. Nidhi Tewathia Unit 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 
PRINT PRODUCTION  SECRETARIAL ASSISTANCE  
Mr. Tilak Raj, Assistant Registrar, IGNOU, New Delhi Mr. Lalit Kumar, SOSS, IGNOU, New Delhi 
Graphics/ Cover Design –  Mr. Lalit Kumar 
July, 2023 
© Indira Gandhi National Open University, 2023 
ISBN: 
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be produced in any form, by mimeograph or any other means, without 
permission in writings from the Indira Gandhi National Open University. 
Further information on the Indira Gandhi National Open University courses may be obtained from the University’s 
office at Maidan Garhi, New Delhi -110068 or visit our website: http://www.ignou.ac.in 
Printed and published on behalf of the Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi, by Director, School of Social 
Sciences. 
Printed at:   


--- Page 4 ---
 
 
3 
COURSE PREPARATION TEAM 
Unit            Block/Unit Title Unit Editor 
BLOCK 1 THEORY OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE 
Unit 1 Classical and Neo-Classical Theories of 
International Trade 
Rahul Chaudhary,  
Consultant IGNOU 
Unit 2  Gains from Trade Dr. Shyam Sundar 
Sr. General Manager - Policy Advisory,  
Mahindra Group 
BLOCK 2 MODERN THEORIES OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE 
Unit 3 Intra-Industry Trade Prof. C Veeramani, Indira Gandhi Institute of 
Development Research, Mumbai 
Unit 4 Alternative Explanations of Trade Dr. Pravin Jadhav, Assistant Professor, Institute 
of Infrastructure Technology Research and 
Management (IITRAM) 
BLOCK 3 FREE TRADE VERSUS PROTECTIONISM 
Unit 5 Policies of Protectionism   Dr. Phool Chand 
Associate Professor of Economics 
PGDAV College, Delhi University 
Unit 6 Instruments of Protectionism Adapted from Unit 4 of the course MEC 004 
written by Dr. Ananya Ghosh Dastidar 
BLOCK 4 EXCHANGE RATE AND BALANCE OF PAYMENTS 
Unit 7 Exchange Rate Regimes 
Prof. S.K. Singh,  
Retd. Prof. IGNOU 
Unit 8 Components of Balance of Payments 
Unit 9 Impossible Trinity: Alternative Scenarios 
Unit 10 Approaches to Balance of Payments 
BLOCK 5 INTERNATIONAL FINANCE 
Unit 11 International Financial Markets and 
Instruments 
Dr. Surendra Kumar,  
PGDAV College, Delhi University 
Unit 12 Financial and Currency Crises Dr. Alok Mishra 
Associate Professor of Economics 
Central University of Hyderabad 
BLOCK 6 GLOBALISATION 
Unit 13 Multilateral Trading System: 
Development and Challenges Dr. Sunandam Ghosh,  
Centre for Development Studies,  
Kerala Unit 14 Regional Trading Agreements 
Unit 15 India and Multilateral Trading System 
BLOCK 7 TRADE, GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT 
Unit 16 Debate on the Trade and Growth Nexus Dr. Rijesh Raju, Institute for Studies in Industrial 
Development (ISID) 
Unit 17 Trade and Environment Prof. S.N. Mukherjee,  
National Institute of Public Finance and Policy 
BLOCK 8 INDIA’S FOREIGN TRADE: POLICY AND CHALLENGES 
Unit 18 India’s Trade Policy Ashish Gupta,  
Motilal Nehru College, Delhi University 
Unit 19 India’s Trade: Trends, Composition and 
Challenges 
Dr. Pravin Jadhav, Assistant Professor, Institute 
of Infrastructure Technology Research and 
Management (IITRAM) 


--- Page 5 ---
 
 4 
 
  


--- Page 6 ---
 
 
5 
COURSE CONTENTS  
(Volume 2) 
 
 Page No 
INTRODUCTION 7 
BLOCK 5 INTERNATIONAL FINANCE 11 
Unit 11 International Financial Markets and Instruments 13 
Unit 12 Financial and Currency Crises 32 
BLOCK 6 GLOBALISATION 53 
Unit 13 Multilateral Trading System: Development and Challenges 55 
Unit 14 Regional Trading Agreements 72 
Unit 15 India and Multilateral Trading System 88 
BLOCK 7 TRADE, GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT 107 
Unit 16 Debate on the Trade and Growth Nexus 109 
Unit 17 Trade and Environment 128 
BLOCK 8 INDIA’S FOREIGN TRADE: POLICY AND 
CHALLENGES 
147 
Unit 18 India’s Trade Policy 149 
Unit 19 India’s Trade: Trends, Composition and Challenges 171 
GLOSSARY 187 
SOME USEFUL BOOKS  
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 7 ---
 
 6 
  


--- Page 8 ---
 
 
7 
COURSE INTRODUCTION 
The global economy is constantly evolving, shaped by technological advancements, geopolitical 
shifts, and changing trade policies. The process of globalization has interconnected economies 
around the world. Increased cross -border trade, investment, and the  international mobility of 
capital, labour, and technology have facilitated the integration of national economies into the 
global marketplace. Further, geopolitical dynamics and power shifts among nations have 
profound effects on cross -border flows and glo bal economic integration. In light of the ever -
changing, dynamic nature of the global economy, the course MEC 107 ‘International Trade 
and Development’ aims to understand these drivers of international (both inter and intra -
industry) trade and international finance.  
This course will provide you with valuable knowledge and skills to understand and navigate the 
complexities of the global economy. International trade plays a crucial role in the economic 
development of nations. By studying this course, learner s will gain a deep understanding of the 
factors that influence global trade patterns, such as trade policies, tariffs, exchange rates, and 
trade agreements. Geopolitical factors play a crucial role in shaping the global economy. 
Political stability, region al conflicts, and international relations impact trade flows, investment 
patterns, and economic alliances. Studying international trade and finance will equip the learners 
with the knowledge to analyze geopolitical developments and their implications on in ternational 
business. 
The course will also throw light into the debate of free trade versus protectionism by discussing 
what happens when countries adopt various instruments of protectionism and how the world is 
affected. In the light of changing nature of  agreements between the countries and the new world 
order, the course also delves into various types of trade agreements and India's agreements with 
various nations. It also digs deeper into the evolved role of India in WTO and traces the evolving 
role sin ce the GATT era. India's foreign trade policy, how it has evolved and what are the 
challenges associated with it are also discussed in depth. The course will equip the learners with 
an understanding of the impact of various policies of countries and intern ational organisations 
that affect global patterns of trade and finance. 
The course is structured around eight blocks. Each block is further subdivided into several units. 
Each Unit is self-contained and has linkages with all other Units.  
Block 1: Theory o f International Trade  introduces the course by discussing the rationale 
behind International trade and why countries engage in trade. This block examines various 
theories of International trade and presents their comparative analysis. It identifies the var ious 
gains associated with international trade and how they can be measured. It also presents the 
comparative analysis of various types of gains in this block. As we move forward, we discuss the 
complementary theories of international trade that are formed  by dropping the classical 
assumptions.  
In Block 2: Modern Theories of International Trade. This block also delves into intra industry 
trade (IIT) i.e. the exchange of similar or closely related goods and services within the same 


--- Page 9 ---
 
 8 
industry between countries or regions. IIT arises due to product differentiation and the diversity 
of consumer preferences is often driven by economies of scale and the ability to achieve cost 
efficiencies through mass production. We discuss the need, rationale and measurement of Intra-
Industry Trade (IIT) in this block.  
After discussing the need and theories of inter -industry and intra -industry trade, we present the 
two contrasting approaches to international trade: Free trade and protectionism, representing 
different policy stances and perspectives on the regulation of trade flows in Block 3: Free trade 
versus protectionism. We discuss the latest developments in India's Protectionism Policy and 
their implications for the Indian economy. To understand how countries adopt free trad e and 
protectionist policies based on their specific economic and political considerations, we also 
discuss various instruments of protectionism -tariff and non -tariff barriers in this block. We 
examine their impact on the world economy as well.  
As we move to Block 4: Exchange Rate and Balance of Payments , we examine the vital role 
that exchange rates and the Balance of Payments play in a country's macroeconomic stability. 
Exchange rate policies have significant implications for a country's trade competitiveness, 
economic growth, and financial stability. S ome countries adopt fixed exchange rate systems, 
while others have floating or managed exchange rate regimes. In this block, we study exchange 
rates and their management to comprehend the advantages, disadvantages, and challenges 
associated with different exchange rate systems. We also trace the historical development of 
international exchange rate regimes and examine operational aspects of the current exchange rate 
regimes. We discuss the balance of payment disequilibrium and the various approaches that 
countries adopt for BOP adjustment. We also analyse the experience of various countries to 
understand the Macroeconomic policy trilemma, the impossible trinity. 
International finance is closely intertwined with international trade. Block 5: International 
Finance will help t o gain an understanding of global financial markets, capital flows, and 
international investment. Block 5 gives an idea of the globalization of financial markets and then 
then the concept of International financial markets. It throws light on the global financial crisis of 
the year 2008. To understand this crisis better, some of the most devastating financial crises in 
history are also presented which will add to the understanding of the unfolding of the 2008 crisis. 
The block also summarise s initial monetary and fiscal policy responses to manage this global 
crisis.  
Since Globalization has opened immense opportunities for businesses to expand beyond national 
borders, we deal in depth with globalization in Block 6: Globalisation. The role of the World 
Trade Organization (WTO) and other multilateral organizations is bec oming increasingly 
important as the world has become more interconnected than ever before, with increased cross -
border trade, investment, and economic integration. This block furnishes an understanding of the 
history and present status of the multilateral trading system in terms of GATT, and WTO rounds. 
We also discuss the types of regional trading agreements, preferential trading arrangements, free 
trade areas and customs unions. India’s role has also evolved in the multilateral trading systems 
and the agr eements of which India is an integral part e.g., the Asia -Pacific Trade agreement, 


--- Page 10 ---
 
 
9 
ASEAN-India free trade area, SAFTA. The block also presents the contribution of India to WTO 
and how India has transformed itself with the change of GATT towards the WTO regime.  
In Block 7: Trade, Growth and Development, we describe the relationship between economic 
growth and trade. The block presents the various trade policy regimes vis -à-vis growth in 
developing countries wherein the import substitution and outward -oriented development 
strategies are discussed. The bloc k also discusses India's experience with inward -oriented and 
outward-oriented regimes. Because of the increased concern about climate change, we also 
discuss the link of trade with climate change and the policies and multilateral environmental 
agreements concerning trade.  
Block 8: India’s Foreign Trade: Policy and Challenges  digs into the concepts, nature and aims of 
trade policy and the basic tools of a trade policy. It will further explain the evolution of the trade 
policy in India. It also presents the pattern, direction and composition of India’s foreign trade. 
The challenges faced by the foreign trade of India be highlighted in the concluding part of the 
block.  
 
  


--- Page 11 ---
 
 10 
 
