--- Page 33 ---
135
Agriculture: Issues,
Concerns, Policy and
Programmatic Initiatives
UNIT 14 LARGE SCALE INDUSTRIES IN
INDIA: ISSUES AND POLICY
Structure
14.0 Objectives
14.1 Introduction
14.2 Industrialisation and Economic Development
14.2.1 What is Industrialisation?
14.2.2 Case for Industrialisation
14.3 Growth Strategy in India
14.3.1 Evolution of Strategy in India’s Plans
14.3.2 Essential Features of Heavy Industries
14.3.3 Policy Support to Strategy
14.3.4 Industrial Policy in India
14.3.5 Legislative Support to Strategy
14.4 Review of Industrial Licensing in India
14.4.1 Phase of Liberalisation
14.4.2 Recent Policy Initiatives Impacting Industrial Growth
14.5 Critical Issues before Industrial Sector
14.5.1 Industiral Sickness
14.5.2 Technological Obsolescence and Modernisation
14.5.3 Productivity in Indian Industry
14.6 Approach to a New Industrial Policy
14.7 Let Us Sum Up
14.8 Term-End Exercises
14.9 Key Words
14.10 References
14.11 Answers or Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises
14.0 OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit, you will be able to:
discuss the relevance of industrialisation in the process of growth and
development of an economy;
appreciate the basic contours of growth strategy pursued in India in the
context of Heavy industrialisation;
identify the role of the state in formulating and operating the industrial policy
in India;
review the relevance of industrial licensing in India and the subsequent phase
of liberalisation;
outline the critical issues facing the industrial sector in India; and
get insights into the approach to the new industrial policy in India.


--- Page 34 ---
136
Sector Specific Issues and
Policies 14.1 INTRODUCTION
As stated elsewhere in this unit, “fast economic development everywhere has
been made possible essentially due to rapid industrialisation.” Industrialisation,
indeed, holds the key to rapid economic growth, as productivity levels in industry
are much higher than in agriculture. Moreover, industrialisation is regarded as
an important policy to affect fundamental economic and social changes in under-
developed countries which are considered as necessary conditions to raise their
growth potentials. No wonder, fast industrialisation as the developmental goal
has a universal appeal, notwithstanding the fact that industrialisation may give
rise to problems like pollution, premature exhaustion of raw materials,
unemployment, and inequalities in income distribution. India has been no
exception to this universal urge. The present unit involves discussion about the
Indian industrial sector with respect to its relevance for the Indian economy’s
growth and development; the strategies and policies initiated to serve this sector;
the issues faced by this sector; and the approach that could be adopted for setting
up the new industrial policy.
14.2 INDUSTRIALISATION AND ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT
Industrialisation has come to be regarded as synonymous with economic
development. There is hardly any country in the world (with the possible exception
of New Zealand) that could reach the level of per capita income of industrially
developed countries of the West, on the back of its agriculture and processing of
its products (petroleum producing countries, like Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and UAE
represent a special case or exception to the positive relationship between per
capita income and the share of manufacturing sector). The main criteria that are
generally being used to distinguish a developed economy from a developing one
relate to the proportion of workforce engaged in industrial activity and the
proportion of national output originating in the industrial sector.
14.2.1 What is Industrialisation?
Industrialisation is a process by which the centre of economic gravity of an
economy shifts from agriculture to industry.
Industrialisation involves two things:
i) Adoption of technologically superior techniques of production that help to
transform basic raw materials and intermediate goods into manufactured
goods;
ii) Application of modern techniques of management and organisation like
economic calculations, accountancy and management techniques.
Large vs. Small Industry
For policy purposes, industrial units are generally classified as (i) micro, small
and medium enterperises (MSMEs) and (ii) large enterprises. For this
categorisation, indicators like capital investment, output capacity, labour
employed are used. Units within the laid down maximum limits of these indicators
are classified as MSMEs. Beyond these limits, all enterprises are treated as large
enterprises.


--- Page 35 ---
137
Large Scale Industries in
India: Issues and Policy
Consumer  vs. Capital Goods
Production units that produce consumer goods are classified as consumer goods
industries, whereas, capital goods are produced in capital goods industries.
Public vs. Private Ownership
Production units set up and managed by a government are classified as units
with public ownership. Privately owned units are the ones owned and managed
by private capital and enterprise.
14.2.2 Case for Industrialisation
The following factors favour rapid industrialisation as a means to accelerate
economic development:
1) Labour Productivity
The productivity in the industrial sector is generally higher due to one or
more of the following reasons:
i) existence of greater capital intensity,
ii) continuity of production,
iii) greater specialisation and division of labour,
iv) less dependence on natural factors,
v) a greater possibility of internal-external economies in the manufacturing
sector.
2) Employment Generation
Industrial activity expansion create more employment opportunities, thus
attracting labour from less productive occupations. This process adds to the
national output as also to the purchasing power and aggregate consumption
expenditure which in turn pulls the aggregate demand upwards and is
instrumental in creating more employment opportunities.
3) Mobilisation of Surplus
A major constraint on development in a developing economy is the lack of
adequate resources to finance the process of capital accumulation.
Inadequacy of resources is the result of two inter-related factors: (a) the
absolute size of resources, national output and saving in a developing
economy is low, and (b) it is not possible to mobilise the surpluses. The
problem of inadequacy of resources is common to all the sectors of the
economy, while the problem of mobilisation of resources is peculiar in the
agricultural sector. The task of mobilisation of surplus savings in this sector
is rendered difficult by the fact that there is no suitable institutional set-up
for this purpose. Such a set-up can more easily be provided in the industrial
sector of the economy. Thus, by concentrating resources on industrialisation
the pace of economic development can be quickened.
14.3 GROWTH STRATEGY IN INDIA
The primary problem to be identified in developmental planning in an
underdeveloped mixed economy is to establish a set of ends or goals that could


--- Page 36 ---
138
Sector Specific Issues and
Policies
be pursued with a specific choice of technique deemed appropriate for that context.
This refers to the strategy of planning. Any strategy for development consists of
three components: resource mobilisation, priorities for the allocation of resources
mobilised, and a policy framework to ensure an efficient deployment of resources
into the priority sectors.
14.3.1 Evolution of Strategy in India’s Plans
It was during the First Five Year Plan (FYP-1 ) period itself that the Planning
Commission had started doing ‘home work’ relating to the formulation of the
FYP-2. A series of studies, under the general guidance of Prof. P.C. Mahalanobis,
were prepared by a group of both Indian and foreign economists and statisticians.
These contributed to the writing of the Mahalanobis’ Plan Frame (hailed as the
most radical Plan outside Communist countries) which became the foundation
of the FYP-2, and for that matter, all long-term planning subsequently. The strategy
aimed at building a self-sufficient economy.
The two basic features of the strategy were: (i)
 E
xplicit emphasis on
industrialisation, and (ii)
 W
ithin the industrial sector, emphasis on the growth of
heavy/capital goods industries.
The essential feature of the strategy was to allocate a given volume of investible
resources in the capital goods producing industries which would yield a relatively
large volume of investment goods and therefore support growth with
transformation of the economy, in comparison to allocation tilted in favour of
consumer goods industries. Hence, the strategy to be driven by the increased
production of heavy engineering or capital goods in the short run required a
higher allocation of investible resources to the capital goods sector. Such a strategy
would lead to lower levels of consumption in the short run, but would yield a
relatively high growth and consumption in the medium to long run. In contrast to
this, an alternative model of development was developed by Vakil and
Brahmananda which laid stress on wage goods or what they called liquid capital
in determining the growth of employment and income. Their model propounded
a strategy of development which accorded the highest priority to wage goods
industries, especially agriculture in allocation of investment resources. However,
policy choice was exercised in favour of the former model.
14.3.2 Essential Features of Heavy Industries
Three essential features of the heavy industries are as follows:
One, capital investment to set up and run such units involves huge sums of money.
Two, the time lag between capital accumulation (investment) and flow of output
(gestation gap) could be fairly large, which could deter private enterprise from
entering such industries. Three, these production units by nature are natural
monopolies, (i.e., these are subject to law of increasing returns to scale). Given
these features, it is no wonder that strategies pertaining to heavy industrialisation
devolves almost exclusively on the State, which is required to set up and operate
such production units. This is precisely what the State in India chose to do.
14.3.3 Policy Support to Strategy
There are several aspects of industrial policy which affect industrial investment
and production.


--- Page 37 ---
139
Large Scale Industries in
India: Issues and Policy
a) Industrial licensing policy which regulates the setting up of new (large and
medium) industrial undertakings and their expansion.
b) Policy concerning the control of monopolies and economic concentration—
and the reservation of certain lines of production for the decentralised, small-
scale sector– which in a way forms an integral part of industrial licensing
policy.
c) Policy regarding technology import. Closely allied to technology import
policy is the policy regarding the import of capital goods, components, and
raw materials.
d) A whole range of financial and fiscal policies which pertain to the provision
of industrial finance, development of the capital market, as well as fiscal
incentives/disincentives to investment and production.
The goal of industrial policy is to influence sectoral development in an economy.
14.3.4 Industrial Policy in India
Till July 24, 1991, when the New Industrial Policy was announced by the
Government, the industrial policy had been chalked out within the framework of
the Industrial Policy Resolution, 1956 (IPR, 1956). The roots of the IPR, 1956,
can be traced back at least
 
to a decade earlier. Immediately after Independence,
it was considered desirable by the Government to announce its attitude towards
private capital and to define the scope of State participation in economic activity.
This aimed at removing all uncertainties that would have worked as constraints
on industrial growth in the economy. This announcement took the form of the
Industrial Policy Resolution, 1948 (IPR, 1948).
IPR 1956
A number of important developments had taken place in India since adoption of
the IPR, 1948. These necessitated a fresh statement on industrial policy. Among
these developments the more important were as follows:
i) New Constitution of India which guaranteed certain Fundamental Rights
and provided for Directive Principles of State Policy.
ii) Completion of the First Five-Year Plan and the commencement of the Second
Plan; and
iii) Acceptance by Parliament of the socialist pattern of society as the objective
of social and economic policy.
The industrial policy, as other policies, was, therefore, to be governed by these
principles and directions. The IPR, 1956, has been known as the ‘ Economic
Constitution’ of India. The Resolution put emphasis on:
i) The development of heavy and machine-building industries;
ii) the expansion of the public sector;
iii) the establishment of a large and growing co-operative sector; and
iv) encouragement to the diffusion of ownership and management in the private
sector.


--- Page 38 ---
140
Sector Specific Issues and
Policies 14.3.5 Legislative Support to Strategy
The system of industrial licensing was adopted in India to give effect to the IPR,
1948. The legislative framework of industrial licensing is embodied in three
different Acts passed at different times.
A) Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951
The Industries (Development and Regulation) Act (in short, known as the IDRA)
was passed in October, 1951. It came into force on May 8, 1952.
1) Objectives The chief objective of the Act, as its title suggests, is the
development and regulation of Indian industries in a manner befitting  a
socialistic society, and other related social, economic or political
considerations.
2) Provisions The Act made the registration of all industrial units in the
scheduled industries compulsory and enjoin upon the owners thereof to obtain
a certificate of registration within a prescribed period. It also required the
new industrial units to be established only after obtaining a licence from the
Central Government. A licence from the Government was required for any
of the following purposes:
a) starting of a new industrial unit,
b) a substantial expansion of the existing unit,
c) the manufacture of a new ‘article’, and
d) shifting the location of an industrial unit.
3) Scope The Act in its original form applied to industries included in the first
schedule to the Act. This schedule covered a number of industries like
metallurgical, industrial machinery, transportation, fertilizers, textiles,
cement, defence, etc.
B) Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969
The Mahalanobis Committee, in 1960, brought out the issue of growing
inequalities in the post-independence period. The Monopoly Inquiry Commission
(MIC) in its Report submitted in 1965 recognised the ill effects of concentration
of economic power. The findings of MIC prompted the Government of India to
enact the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act (MRTPA), 1969 which
came into force on June 1, 1970, with the objective of prevention of concentration
of economic power to the common detriment, control of monopolies and
prohibition of monopolistic/restrictive trade practices. The Act covered
monopolistic trade practices and restrictive trade practices. Unfair trade practice
was added through amendment in 1984.
The issue of concentration of economic power was addressed by the government
by making it obligatory for undertakings with assets of the total value of Rs. 20
crore or more (later raised to Rs. 100 crore or more in 1985 and removed altogether
in 1991) and for dominant undertakings which enjoy 1/4
th of the market share of
the total market (which was initially 1/3rd) with assets of Rs. one crore or more,
to seek prior approval before effecting expansion of the undertaking.


--- Page 39 ---
141
Large Scale Industries in
India: Issues and Policy
C) Foreign Exchange Regulation
The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (FERA, 1973)– often described as
the economic canvas of the country– had its origin in the Foreign Exchange
Regulation Act, 1947 (FERA, 1947).
The FERA, 1973 was formulated in the background of a highly restrictive and
centrally controlled industrial policy regime. The subsequent amendment to the
FERA in 1993 substantially diluted its regulatory provisions and brought it in
line with the new liberalised industrial, trade and exchange rate policies. The
FERA has since been repealed and replaced by FEMA.
D) Other Controls
1) The Companies Act, 2011
The Companies Act, 2011 was enacted to comprehensively amend the 55-
year old Companies Act, 1956. The Act was aimed at the modernisation of
corporate regulation.
2) The Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956
The Act provides for, apart from regulation of stock exchanges, a general
system and apparatus of control to ensure fair dealing in securities and
investors protection. In terms of recent amendment to this Act, companies
cannot reject, except on technical grounds, share transfer without appropriate
reference to the Company Law Board.
3) Import and Export Control
Import and export control in India is exercised under the provisions of the
Foreign Trade (Regulation and Development) Act, 1992, which succeeds
the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947. The principal objective of the
Act is ‘to provide for the development and regulation of foreign trade by
facilitating imports into, and augmenting exports from, India.
4) Commodity Control
Commodity control in India is exercised under the provisions of various
Acts enacted by the Government. The first in the list is the Essential
Commodities Act, 1955, which empowers the Central Government to control,
regulate or prohibit the production, distribution, transport, trade,
consumption, or storage of a large number of commodities, to prescribe
their prices and even to take over stocks on conditions that it set. Besides,
there are several enactments to control various specific commodities like
coffee, coir, tea, rubber, sugar, etc.
5) Financial and Credit Controls
Allocation of credit is subject to guidelines or policy announced by the
government from time to time. Since a large part of the financial sector is in
the public sector, the government exercises formal and informal control
over the allocation of financial resources.
6) Location, Environment and Labour Legislation
The location of industries is banned in the municipal areas of all towns and
cities, as well as in specific areas around the largest twenty cities.


--- Page 40 ---
142
Sector Specific Issues and
Policies
Environmental and pollution control clearance for all projects above a certain
size is also mandatory. The rules regarding closure of units, retrenchment of
labour, compensation, and sale of assets of a sick unit are governed by a
comprehensive set of labour laws.
To top all these controls is the Companies Act , which, in its present
incarnation, has 658 sections and hundreds of sub-sections, clauses, sub-
clauses and amendments governing every aspect of the running of a company,
from audits and printing of annual reports, to remuneration of directors, and
investments and mergers.
Check Your Progress 1
1) What do you understand by the term ‘Industrialisation’? How does
industrialisation contribute to economic development?
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
2) How does the strategy for the industrial sector evolved during the planning
era in India?
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
14.4 REVIEW OF INDUSTRIAL LICENSING IN
INDIA
Industrial licensing was introduced in India with the enactment of the IDRA,
1951, in pursuance of the IPR, 1948. The system worked to provide protection to
the Indian industry. It could be argued that protection, both against potential
domestic competition and foreign competition, was the right approach in the
initial stage of industrialisation in a developing economy which was struggling
to come out of the stranglehold posed by two-centuries old colonial domination.
The industrial landscape underwent a dramatic change within a period of about
four decades. But the major failure of the policy of protection was that it did not
have a built-in mechanism that could prompt the industry to adapt itself to the
fast-changing technological scene to which a large part of the underdeveloped
world was responding with zeal and enthusiasm. The industrial structure of India,
under the burden of protection, turned out to be high-cost and low-quality that
lacked the basic ingredients of international competitiveness. Instead of fortifying


--- Page 41 ---
143
Large Scale Industries in
India: Issues and Policy
the economy (where domestic economy will be protected against outright
incursions), we made a ‘jail’ out of it. The tiger was ‘caged’ and remained so for
long, its muscles became frigid and lacked in flexibility.
It was becoming increasingly clear that the industrial policy would have to be
taken out of the “convoluted cobweb” in which it had got landed, system of
controls would have to be gradually given up and the industrial economy
liberalised, so as to enable it to breathe some fresh air.
14.4.1 Phase of Liberalisation
New Industrial Policy, 1991
Experiments with domestic liberalisation began in the mid-1970s. In 1975, a
scheme was introduced which provided for an increase in licensed capacity up
to a maximum of 25 per cent in a five-year period. Other measures included
regularisation of capacities in excess of authorised capacities for select industries,
some liberalisation from controls for units which exported 100 per cent of their
production, and a more general scheme of re-endorsement of capacities introduced
in 1982. The exemption limit for industrial licensing was also raised from Rs. 1
crore as set in 1970 to Rs. 3 crore in 1978 and to Rs. 5 crore in 1983, and further
since June 1988 to Rs. 25 crores for those units that were set up in the non-
backward areas and to Rs. 75 crores for those units that were set up in the backward
areas. The main emphasis during the 1970s was on reducing the restrictive and
complex features of the licensing policy.
The process of liberalisation got a fillip with the announcement of the New
Industrial Policy (NIP) in July 1991, and entered a new phase of what has been
described as ‘reform by storm’ that supplants ‘reform by stealth’ of the last half
of the 1970s, and ‘reform with reluctance’ during the second half of the 1980s.
As already stated earlier the NIP has made a bonfire of the industrial licensing
system by throwing out various provisions. There has also been some move
away from extensive physical controls and an increase in the role of financial
incentives in channelling investments in the desired areas. This, plus the lowering
of the tax rates combined with better administration of the revenue-collecting
system, helped in attracting investments and boosting economic activity which
had strayed away from the mainstream. The role of the financial institutions for
their intermediation functions become very important in the new regime.
1) Foreign Investment
i) Automatic approval is available to FDI in almost all sectors except a few
sensitive ones. Automatic approval is available for 50 per cent, 51 per cent,
74 per cent and even 100 per cent in specified industry groups.
ii) To provide access to international markets, majority foreign equity holding
up to 51 per cent equity will be allowed for trading companies primarily
engaged in export activities.
iii) The Foreign Investment Promotion Board has been constituted to negotiate
with a number of large international firms and approve direct foreign
investment in select areas.


--- Page 42 ---
144
Sector Specific Issues and
Policies
2) Foreign Technology Agreements
i) Automatic permission is to be given for foreign technology agreements in
identified high priority industries up to a lumpsum payment of $ 2 million,
5 per cent royalty for domestic sales and 8 per cent for exports, subject to
total payments of 8 per cent of sales over a 10-year period from date of
agreement or 7 years from commencement of production.
ii) In respect of industries other than those included above, automatic permission
is to be given subject to the same guidelines as if no foreign exchange is
required for any payments.
3) Public Sector
a) Portfolio of public sector investments is to be reviewed with a view to focus
the public sector on strategic, high-tech and essential infrastructure. Whereas
some reservation for the public sector is being retained, there is no bar for
areas of exclusivity to be opened up to the private sector selectively. Similarly,
the public sector is also to be allowed entry in areas not reserved for it.
b) Public enterprises which are chronically sick and which are unlikely to be
turned around will, for the formulation of revival/rehabilitation schemes,
are to be referred to the Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction.
c) In order to raise resources and encourage wider public participation, a part
of the government’s shareholding in the public sector would be offered to
mutual funds, financial institutions, general public and workers.
4) MRTP Act
a) The MRTP Act has been amended to remove the threshold limits of assets in
respect of MRTP Companies and dominant undertakings.
b) Provisions relating to concentration of economic power, pre-entry restrictions
with regard to prior approval of the Central government for establishing a
new undertaking, expanding an existing undertaking, amalgamations,
mergers etc., have been deleted.
c) Emphasis has been placed on controlling and regulating monopolistic,
restrictive and unfair trade practices.
5) There is considerable internal deregulation aimed at strengthening the more
efficient domestic firms and encouraging them to invest and expand. This is
expected to inject much more competition into the system, creating incentives
for reducing costs. Scientists tell us that the diamond sparkles because of a
phenomenon called total internal reflection. If our economy is to sparkle,
total internal liberalisation is the key.
6) Measures have also been taken to improve the legal framework.
The Securitisation, Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of
Security Interest Act, 2002 gives powers to banks and financial institutions
to enforce their claims on collateral for delinquent secured credit, without
going through a long and cumbersome judicial process.
