--- Page 114 ---
216
Sector Specific Issues and
Policies
in urban areas they are engaged in small shops, low-scale businesses or
intermediation activities. Larger share of the self-employed and casual labour
households indicates the extent of hardships millions of households must have
undergone due to the suspension of economic activities amid the COVID-19
outbreak. The closure of businesses results in lost wages for workers in many
cases, especially in the informal economy where there is no paid leave. The
results of many surveys reveal that workers in the informal sector experienced
decline in their incomes or loss of income altogether. This in turn has pushed the
masses into deeper poverty.
Check Your Progress 4
1) List out the major challenges being faced by the informal sector and
particularly the informal service sector in India.
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
2) Do you agree that demonetisation of currency of high denominations in
November 2016 which was followed by introduction of GST in July 2017
have further worsened the situation of informal sector in India?
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
17.6 POLICY IMPLICATIONS
Unit 16 highlighted the fact that reforms in India at the sectoral level have evolved
in an ad-hoc way which is probably one of the most important reasons for lopsided
growth in services. There has been no coherent overall policy for services in line
with the industrial policy and agricultural policy. Consequently, the depth and
pace of reforms lack uniformity across sectors. In that unit, role and significance
of some services sub-sectors was highlighted. As the size of informal service
sector is quite large and provides the livelihood to those needed it most, i.e.,
vulnerable groups (unskilled, semi-skilled, illiterate persons, women, etc.) of
the society, under this section, the role of government at various levels is
highlighted so that informal sector can also grow with high productivity and
those employed in this sector can enjoy the benefits of social security, high rates
wages/remuneration and security of jobs.
17.6.1 Role and Responsibility of the Governments
Since decent work deficits are often traceable to good governance deficits, the
government has a primary role to play in improving the quality of work


--- Page 115 ---
217
Services Sector II: Informal
Sector - Issues and Policy
opportunities. Governments should adopt a dynamic approach to place decent
employment at the centre of economic and social development policies. It must
promote well-functioning labour markets and labour market institutions, including
labour market information systems and credit institutions. To increase job quantity
and quality, emphasis should be placed on investing in people, especially the
most vulnerable – in their education, skills training, lifelong learning, health and
safety – and encouraging their entrepreneurial initiative. Poverty reduction
strategies, in particular, should specifically address the problems in the informal
economy. The creation of decent jobs should be a measure of success for these
strategies.
Governments should have a lead responsibility to extend the coverage of social
security to groups in the informal economy which are currently excluded. Micro
insurance and other community-based schemes are important but should be
developed in ways that are consistent with the extension of national social security
schemes. The government has launched several policies and programmes for the
development of the small and informal sector markets, but the perks of such
initiatives do not seem to be reaching the actual targets. When enquired, it seems
that they are unaware of these policies and programmes. For example, while the
Central Government has passed the Street Vendors Act, 2014, which aims to
protect the livelihood of street vendors, the same has not been implemented at
the municipal level in many districts of the country. Granting legitimacy to street
vendors is one of the strongest tools for formalisation, and while the provisions
exist in law, the same need to be strictly implemented and enforced at the states
and municipal levels.
Thus, making the administrative procedures simpler and less costly, introducing
special and lower tax rates for small firms, providing them proper access to
credit and financing for their better management, taking care of their social
security contributions and replacing inspections and fines with training to improve
awareness and knowledge of the entrepreneurs so that they are not harassed by
the public officials are some of the measures which can help in promoting
formalisation among the micro, small and medium firms.
Policies should also aim at developing greater understanding of the relationship
between the informal economy and the feminisation of work and identify and
implement strategies to ensure that women have equal opportunities to enter and
enjoy decent work.
17.6.2 Access to Credit
The informal business owners cannot use their assets as collateral when requesting
for formal credit. Thus, obtaining adequate financing is difficult and costly for
informal firms, making it hard to run and expand their business. Thus, policies
providing them access to finance and credit acts as incentives to formalise. For
instance, Colombia promoted young entrepreneurs and provided them easy access
to credit. “Colombia goes formal” helped firms who wished to formalise, through
credit lines and grants.
All these measures if implemented by the governments at various levels with
utmost sincerity and transparency will improve the image of informal sectors
within a reasonable period of time. Particularly, if the state initiates efforts as
early as possible to provide social insurance coverage to the poor among the


--- Page 116 ---
218
Sector Specific Issues and
Policies
unorganised segment, informal workers, this process will constitute a huge gain
for the realisation of the rights of workers.
17.6.3 Tax Reforms
The tax laws and regulations that come along with formalisation are something
that the small business owners take into account while making the decision to
formalise. Not only the rates, but the complexity of procedures, multiplicity of
taxes and the lack of information and support also disincentivises the entrepreneurs
from formalising their business.
In order to promote formalisation, the steps that could be taken in the field of
taxation include special tax regimes for MSMEs, convenient payment
mechanisms, proper information and assistance and measures to check tax
evasion. Special tax regimes for MSMEs include lower tax rates, certain
exemptions, and integration of different taxes into a single payment. For instance,
in Costa Rica, small companies faced preferential tax rates and were exempted
from a corporate tax. Only the MSMEs registered with the Ministry of Economy
could take benefit of this exemption, thus reinforcing formalisation.
17.6.4 Social Security Contributions
Informal businesses often fail to comply with their obligation related to the social
security coverage of the workers in the firm. The costs related to declaring and
paying to different social security administrators acts as obstacles to formalisation.
Another disincentive to formalisation is the lack of continuity in social security
payments, caused by seasonal or intermittent employment in micro and small
enterprises. Limited knowledge among employers and employees about the real
benefits of social security constitutes another obstacle.
Given these difficulties, the benefits from complying with social security payment
schedules should be such that the stakeholders consider them to be valuable. The
services that these schemes provide should be of good quality, in areas such as
health, maternity and unemployment. Schemes like accidental insurance coverage
at work act as incentives to labour formalisation. Social security schemes should
be designed with the following characteristics to favour formalisation: (a)
progressive social security contributions, (a) subsidies for social security
contributions on low-income wages, (c) reduction of the administration costs of
social security schemes.
17.6.5 Inspection and Compliance
The limited control of the tax and labour authorities over the informal firms acts
as an obstacle to their formalisation. Regulation concerns not only labour law,
but also health and safety, taxation, accounting rules, technical standards,
consumer rights, bureaucratic procedures, and more. There is need for better
regulatory environment. Complying with the law must become easier and law
enforcement should be more effective. It is important that the small firm owners
are not harassed by the public authorities.
Measures that involve capacity building are more effective than punitive sanctions
for lack of compliance. For example, in Chile and Peru, inspectorates provide
training for micro and small enterprises (MSEs) to comply with the law,


--- Page 117 ---
219
Services Sector II: Informal
Sector - Issues and Policy
particularly on safety and health issues, instead of imposing a fine on them for
defaulting. In order, to be able to impart better knowledge and information about
the rules and regulations, it is necessary to train the officials to interact with the
employers and at the same time, it is necessary to organise training programmes
and information campaigns for employers and employees of micro and small
enterprises.
17.6.6 Awareness and Promotional Campaigns
Very often, micro and small entrepreneurs lack awareness of not just rules and
regulations but also of various policies and schemes being run by the authorities
to support registered enterprises. Industry and trade Chambers such as FICCI,
CII and ASSOCHAM, in collaboration with or through other relevant
organisations could assist economic units operating in the informal economy in
a number of important ways, including access to information which they would
otherwise find difficult to obtain. They could extend business support and basic
services for productivity improvement, entrepreneurship development, personnel
management, accounting, and the like. They could help develop a lobbying agenda
specially geared to the needs of micro and small enterprises.
Trade unions can sensitise workers in the informal economy to the importance
of having collective representation through education and outreach programmes.
They can also make efforts to include workers in the informal economy in
collective agreements. With women accounting for a majority in the informal
economy, trade unions should create or adapt internal structures to promote the
participation and representation of women and also to accommodate their specific
needs. Trade unions can provide special services to workers in the informal
economy, including information on their legal rights, educational and advocacy
projects, legal aid, provision of medical insurance, credit and loan schemes and
the establishment of cooperatives.
17.7  LET US SUM UP
The Service sector in India has been the fastest growing sector in the last decade.
Within the service sector, we find that the fastest growing services in the 1990s
have been trade, communications, financial services, business services and
community services like health and education. The literature on growth in service
sector primarily argues that when an economy grows, both demand side and
supply side factors operate that lead to higher growth in the service sector as
compared to the other sectors and also lead to a larger share of service sector in
total employment.
However, the unfortunate part of growth of the service sector over time has led
to informalisation of its growth process thereby creating a dualism in the sector
wherein one component is growing very fast with high productivity while other
component, quite large in size, has become laggard growing in size but not in
terms of growth in productivity and profitability. As a result, those employed in
the laggard informal service sector remain vulnerable in terms of low level of
income and wages, insecurity of jobs, lack of social security and other benefits
associated with the job if it had been in the formal service sector.  The dynamic
analysis presented in this unit highlights the factors responsible for such a growth
of the sector and policy initiatives needed at comprehensive scale to improve the


--- Page 118 ---
220
Sector Specific Issues and
Policies
image and status of informal sector. Many of the issues highlighted above if
addressed can help in further growth of the services sector. This can make the
services sector which is already the dominant growth contributor to become a
high growth propeller, along with foreign exchange earner and employment
provider for India.
17.8 KEY WORDS
Covid-19 : Coronavirus disea se 2019 is a mild to severe
respiratory illness that is caused by
a
 
Coronavirus.
Demonetisation : The act of stripping a currency unit of its
status as legal tender.
Goods and Services Tax : An indirect tax (or consumption tax) used in
(GST) India on the supply of goods and services. It
is a comprehensive, multi-stage, destination-
based tax that is levied on every value
addition made along the supply chain.
Import-substituting Strategy : A trade strategy or policy that advocates
replacing foreign imports with domestic
production.
Informal Sector : Informal sector refers to all economic
activities by workers and economic units that
are – in law or in practice – not covered or
insufficiently covered by formal
arrangements.
17.9 REFERENCES
In addition to the readings listed under Unit-16, some additional readings are
listed below:
1) Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry and Konrad-
Adenauer- Stiftung (2017).‘ Informal Economy in India: Setting the
framework for formalization’, published by FICCI, Tansen Marg, New Delhi.
2) Kundu, A., & Sharma, A. N. (Eds). (2001). Informal sector in India:
Perspectives and policies . New Delhi: Institute for Human Development
and Institute of Applied Manpower Research.
3) Ministry of Finance (2018). “Economic Survey of India 2017-18”
Government of India, New Delhi.
4) Ministry of Lavor and Employment (2013-14). “Report on Employment in
Informal Sector and Conditions of Informal Employment (2013-14), V olume
IV”, Government of India, New Delhi.
5) NSO (2019). 2017-18-unit level data, Periodic Labour Force Survey, NSSO
Ministry of Statistics and Program Implementation. Government of India.
New Delhi.


--- Page 119 ---
221
Services Sector II: Informal
Sector - Issues and Policy
6) NSSO (2013). 2010-11-unit level data, 67th round, Unincorporated Non-
agricultural (excluding Construction) enterprise survey in India, Ministry
of Statistics and Program Implementation. Government of India. New Delhi.
7) NSSO (2014). 2011-12-unit level data, 68th round, Employment
Unemployment survey, NSSO Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation. Government of India. New Delhi.
8) National Statistical office (2015). Report of the Sub Committee on
Unorganized Manufacturing & Services Sectors for Compilation of National
Accounts Statistics with Base Year 2011-12.
9) Rangarajan C., Padma I. K. and Seema (2011). “Where Is the Missing Labour
Force?”, Economic and Political Weekly, V ol. 46, No. 39.
10) Report of the Working Group on Business Regulatory Framework 2011,
“Towards Optimal Business Regulatory Governance in India”, Steering
Committee on Industry, Planning Commission, Government of India.
17.10 ANSWERS OR HINTS TO CHECK YOUR
PROGRESS EXERCISES
Check Your Progress 1
1) See Section 17.2 and answer.
2) See Section 17.2 and answer.
3) See Section 17.2 and answer.
Check Your Progress 2
1) See Section 17.3 and answer.
2) See Section 17.3 and answer.
3) See Section 17.3 and answer.
Check Your Progress 3
1) See Section 17.4 and answer.
2) See Section 17.4 and answer.
Check Your Progress 4
1) See Section 17.5 and answer.
2) See Sub-section 17.5.4 and 17.5.5 and answer.


--- Page 120 ---
222
Sector Specific Issues and
Policies APPENDIX 17.1
Why Informal India cannot be ‘Atmanirbhar’ India?
Atmanirbharta, or self-reliance, has been a holy grail for the Indian economy.
 I
n
its present avatar, the idea hovers around increasing competitiveness and growth
of the
 
manufacturing sector which will in turn is expected to further expand the
service sector. Competitiveness arises from productivity differentials, which, in
turn, are a function of firm size. Larger firms are more productive with higher
value added per capita, and higher levels of sales and output per employee. Formal
status is another empirically established characteristic of productive firms across
countries. World Bank’s micro and informal enterprise surveys show that for
India the wedge between value added per employee in a registered and
unregistered firm is 35 per cent, that between a small registered firm and a large
firm is 68 per cent, and that between a large registered firm and an unregistered
firm is 212 per cent.This differential is due to large, formal firms’ access to
external finance, and use of more capital per labour. These firms with economies
of scale are often run by better educated managers, and employ specialised staff
for specific functions, resulting in better internal processes, and customer outreach,
allowing these firms to generate sustainable productivity differentials to achieve
competitiveness.
There are 19.67 million micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs)
employing 36.04 million people. The share of micro enterprises, among MSMEs
is almost 99 per cent.The antimonopoly regulations and stringent labour laws
practised over years have ensured that the average Indian manufacturing firm
remained small in size. The employment-generating and cost-cutting
characteristics of these informal firms have made us believe that informality is
forced by excessive cost of regulation. It is important to start acknowledging
that these firms may be unproductive, run by lowly qualified managers, unable
to function efficiently and, therefore, out of formal structure. The notion that
economic growth will generate returns for these firms, bringing them into
formality has not worked so far. Nor is there much empirical support for the
hypothesis of registration alone increasing their productivity.
Shift to a formal status would typically mean additional costs of paying taxes,
adhering to safety norms, and providing additional employment benefits to
workers. All these are genuine costs. Any estimation of loss of revenue to the
exchequer due to tax evasion, loss of lives and project assets due to non-
compliance with safety norms, and loss of productivity due to non-provision of
social security to employees, is sure to bypass the loss of profitability to informal
enterprises.
However, thrust of the self-reliance movement undoubtedly has to be on designing
regulatory systems conducive to creating large firms with a clear competitive
edge. Ample macroeconomic evidence suggests that limited access to capital
constrains productivity growth in developing countries. Ownership of banks by
the government has resulted in hampered credit allocation as there is a conflict
of interest between social objectives and the running of an efficient financial
system. Implicit government guarantee weakens their incentives to pursue
operational efficiency. They are prone to evergreen non-performing loans and
keep insolvent borrowers afloat. Slow in adopting new technologies to improve


--- Page 121 ---
223
Services Sector II: Informal
Sector - Issues and Policy
the efficiency of financial intermediation, public banks are more susceptible to
distress than private banks. Their investment in government securities reduces
availability of loans to the private sector. Designing regulations to prune these
hydra-headed institutions is vital in pursuance of self-reliance.
‘Atmarnirbhar’ development requires organisations that can benefit from scale
economies, entrepreneurs who take risks and grow those organisations,
independent professionals who have the skills that can support technological
progress and productivity growth, and banks that understand the hazards of
providing credit and that diversify their risks while financing growth. It requires
regulating and unleashing the power of markets and holding back the temptation
to use the state to direct scarce resources towards centrally-handed-down goals.
The informal sectoreffectively constitutes 90 per cent of the workforce and about
50 per cent of the national product. As per Government of India statistics, the
unorganised sector contributes almost 50 per cent of the total GDP. The Economic
Survey of 2018-19, released on 4 July, 2019, said “almost 93 per cent” of the
total workforce is “informal”. Around 86per cent of those working in the informal
sector are not covered under labour legislation and they have absolutely no
protection in terms of employment as they do not have an appointment letter,
contract, guarantee for wages, health facilities, insurance, etc. They are at the
mercy of the employer.
If the Centre realises the importance of the informal sector and its contribution
to the economic growth of the country, it will need to define the sector effectively,
provide labour legislation to protect employment, wages and treat them on par
with the formal sector. As long as these measures are not put in place, it is difficult
for informal India to become Atmanirbhar India.
