--- Page 39 ---
38 
The Financial System: 
Overview UNIT 3 BASIC BUSINESS ACCOUNTING 
Structure 
3.0  Objectives 
3.1  Introduction 
3.2  Basic Concepts of Accounting 
3.2.1 The Balance Sheet 
3.2.1 The Cash Flow Statement 
3.2.1 The Income Statement 
3.3  Real Assets and Financial Assets 
3.4  The National Accounts  
3.5  Flow of Funds Accounts 
3.6  The Relationship between Stocks and Flows 
3.7  Exchange Rates 
3.8  Rate of Interest  
3.9  Government Borrowings 
3.10  Nominal and Real Interest Rates 
3.11  Let Us Sum Up 
3.12  Key Words 
3.13  Some Useful References 
3.14  Answers/ Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
3.0  OBJECTIVES 
The main objective of this Unit is to: 
 understand the framework of accounting, focusing on its process and the
concept of financial statements;
 recognise the importance of financial markets in the Indian economy
through a focus on real assets and financial assets;
 interpret the macroeconomic analysis of flows which incorporates
national accounts, flow of funds accounts, international transactions etc.
and
 know the certain features of the rate of interest.
3.1 INTRODUCTION  
The main objective of this unit is to illustrate the basics of accounting which 
is usually recognised as the language of business. In financial terms, it 


--- Page 40 ---
39 
Basic Business 
Accounting 
implies that accounting is the process of recording and reporting of business 
transactions (monetary terms) which enable users (owners, management, 
employees, banks etc.) to make appropriate judgements and decisions. 
Accounting is a significant tool to understand the functioning of financial 
markets. The concept of stocks and flows play an important role in grasping 
the economic meaning of accounting.  
The accounting process normally starts with an economic activity which is 
then originated in the form of a document or a voucher. Several copies of the 
voucher are sent to the accounts department where they are recorded, 
analysed and kept in the books of accounts. After the recording of the 
transaction, classification is the next step which includes posting transactions 
in ledgers and further summarising them in the form of trial balance, trading 
profit and loss account and balance sheet. The next step is the analysis and 
interpretation and finally communication of the essential information to the 
users for financial decision-making.  
It is necessary to understand the difference between stocks and flows to 
understand accounting. Thus, these concepts are well defined in Section 3.2 
illustrating the statements such as balance sheet, income statement and cash 
flow statement.  
The purpose of Section 3.3 is to outline a framework of real assets and 
financial assets and their disclosure in the balance sheet. Real assets are the 
assets used to produce goods and services. Financial assets are considered as 
claims on real assets or the income generated by them. The building is a real 
asset that is created. On the other hand, the loan is a financial asset which is 
designed by the transaction.  
A macro-economic analysis is explained in Section 3.4 which covers national 
income accounts and national product accounts. Another tool of macro-
economic analysis is the flow of funds accounts which is described in Section 
3.5. Several indicators of financial development are also emphasized.  
A fundamental distinction is made between stock and flow. Both concepts are 
used in calculating the national income of the country. For instance, saving is 
recognized as stock and investment is recognized as flow. The relationship 
between savings and investment is described in Section 3.6.  
The importance of exchange rates in the international financial markets is 
explained in Section 3.7. The rate of interest is well-defined in Section 3.8 
regarding the barter system and its impact on the economy. Rates of interest 
further emphasize how the emergence of the monetary system influences it. 
Government borrowing represents the government's process of raising money 
by issuing bonds or other securities to investors and it discusses in Section 3.9 
that how government borrowings are financed. Lastly, the importance of 
nominal and real interest rates in the financial system is being elaborated in 
Section 3.10.  


--- Page 41 ---
40 
The Financial System: 
Overview 3.2 BASIC CONCEPTS OF ACCOUNTING 
Accounting concepts imply the basic assumptions which are the building 
blocks of any business entity. Based on these assumptions, financial 
statements are prepared. In the context of accounting, two types of statements 
are reflected in the figure 
The balance sheet is usually referred to as the stock statement. Flow 
Statements are further demarcated into two kinds i.e., cash flow statement 
and income statement. These statements are meant for business firms as well 
as for individuals.  
3.2.1 The Balance Sheet 
Balance Sheet is the statement which discloses the financial condition of the 
firm at a specific point in time. The balance sheet aims to ascertain the 
amount of assets the firm owns and the amount of liabilities it owes to 
outside parties. Assets are the resources owned by the business expecting to 
have benefits in the future. On the other hand, liabilities are represented as 
the borrowings or the obligations of the firm. Net worth is the difference 
between assets and liabilities which reflects the value of the firm. An 
illustrative balance sheet of firm is depicted in the table 3.1. 
Table 3:1 Balance Sheet as on 2020 and 2021 (millions) 
Particulars 2020 2021 
Assets 
Cash 70 90 
Accounts Receivable 210 200 
Land and Building 180 180 
Plant and Equipment 700 720 
Inventories 160 140 
Total Assets 1320 1330 
Liabilities 
Loan from Bank 400 300 
Accounts Payable 100 150 
Types of Statements 
Stock Statements Flow Statements 


--- Page 42 ---
41 
Basic Business 
Accounting 
Mortgages and Bonds 560 540 
Total Liabilities 1060 990 
Net Worth 260 340 
Cash is an important component for every firm which includes currency and 
readily available bank deposits. Accounts payable implies creditors and bills 
payables i.e., payable to the firm’s suppliers. Bank loans also represent a 
liability. Accounts receivables imply debtors and bills receivables i.e., the 
amount received from the firm’s customers. Some adjustments might be 
required for bad debts (amount uncollected from debtors or customers). 
Taking into consideration the value of the firm, land and building as well as 
plant and equipment are reflected at their historical costs as per the 
accounting convention. However, certain economists would value the land, 
plant and equipment at current value. Therefore, to avoid this complexity, the 
firm's financial statements are being prepared in conformity with Generally 
Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). The purpose of these principles is 
to prohibit misrepresentation and to provide accounting insight. This is also 
shown in the table that the assets such as plant and equipment and other 
categories normally lose their value because of wear and tear which is called 
depreciation. Depreciation is normally deducted from the value of the asset 
and the balance sheet reflects the depreciated value of the asset. Inventories 
which are also in the category of assets comprise raw materials (inputs), 
finished products (produced but not yet sold) and work in progress (in 
process).  
Lastly, the category of liabilities is the mortgages and bonds which are shown 
as face or par value as per GAAP. However, bond prices normally fluctuate if 
traded in the credit or bond market. The firm would value the bonds at the 
market price if it is less than the face value of the bond as the bonds can be 
bought back at the price by the debtor.  
3.2.2 The Cash Flow Statement 
A cash flow statement is a statement of inflows and outflows of cash of the 
business firm during the accounting period. This statement summarises the 
cash transactions into certain categories such as operating, investing and 
financing activities.  
Operating activities are involved in the activities which produce revenue such 
as cash receipts from the sale of goods and providing services, cash payments 
to employees etc.  
Investing activities comprise of purchase and sale of long-term assets such as 
cash payments to purchase fixed assets. 
Financing activities involve those activities which result in changes in the 
size and composition of the owner’s capital (both preference and equity 


--- Page 43 ---
42 
The Financial System: 
Overview 
shares) and borrowings of the firm such as cash received from issuing shares, 
payment of cash dividends etc.  
3.2.3 The Income Statement 
Though the cash flow statement provides information about the cash flows of 
the firm during a period this information is restricted to the extent of cash 
flows from operating, investing and financing activities. This statement 
neither reflects the revenues recognized nor the expenses incurred during the 
period. It is mainly the income statement which displays the revenues 
recognized and expenses incurred. Revenues are generally recognized in the 
period in which goods are delivered and services are offered. It is not 
necessary to make payment at that period. Expenses are used in the 
generation of revenues irrespective of whether the cash was used to pay those 
expenses.  
The income statement is prepared by the business firm before the cash flow 
statement is prepared.  
Therefore, there is no direct relationship between the income earned and cash 
flows associated with the period.  
3.3 REAL ASSETS AND FINANCIAL ASSETS  
Real assets and financial assets are two different kinds of assets, each with its 
own features and investment opportunities. 
Real assets are tangible assets, such as real estate, land, machinery, and 
commodities, that have intrinsic (fair) value due to their physical properties 
or usefulness. These assets can generate income or appreciate over time. 
These assets are often used as a hedge against inflation. Financial assets, on 
the other hand, are intangible assets, such as stocks, bonds, mutual funds, and 
currencies, that represent a claim to expected cash flows or certain ownership 
rights. These assets have a major hold in the financial markets and demand 
and supply forces determine the value of financial assets.  
The relationship between real assets and financial assets is complex and 
dynamic. In general, the performance of real assets can impact the 
performance of financial assets and vice versa. For example, a rise in the 
value of real estate appreciated the value of real estate investment trusts 
(REITs), which are financial assets that invest in real estate properties. 
Similarly, fluctuations in commodity prices can influence the performance of 
mutual funds which invest in commodities. Financial assets, such as stocks 
and bonds, can also impact real assets. For example, changes in interest rates 
can impact the demand for real estate, as higher interest rates can make it 
more expensive for people to borrow money to buy a house. Stock market 
fluctuations can also impact investor confidence, which can affect investment 
decisions in real assets. 


--- Page 44 ---
43 
Basic Business 
Accounting 
To conclude, it can be said that both real assets and financial assets have 
different investment opportunities and bear their risks and returns. A 
balanced investment strategy can be achieved by incorporating a mix of both 
assets by diversifying into portfolios.  
Disclosure of Real Assets and Financial Assets in the Balance Sheet of 
the Firm 
Because of varying characteristics, both real assets and financial assets are 
disclosed separately in the balance sheet of the firm. Real assets, such as 
property, plant, and equipment (PPE), are typically known as long-term 
assets and are shown under the non-current assets of the balance sheet. PPE 
includes assets that have a useful life of more than one year, such as land, 
buildings, machinery, and equipment. These assets are usually reported at 
their historical cost less accumulated depreciation, which reflects the wear 
and tear or obsolescence of the assets over time. Real assets can also include 
other long-term assets such as patents, copyrights, and trademarks, which are 
intangible but still have a real value to the company. 
Financial assets, such as cash, accounts receivable, and investments in 
securities, are typically classified as either current or non-current assets, 
depending on their liquidity and expected holding period. Current assets are 
assets that are expected to be converted into cash within one year, while non-
current assets are assets that are expected to be held for more than one year. 
Financial assets are usually reported at their fair market value or market 
price, which reflects the current market value of the asset at the time of the 
balance sheet. 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) What is meant by accounting? Demonstrate the types of statements
prepared by the business entity during an accounting period.
...................................................................................................................
...................................................................................................................
...................................................................................................................
...................................................................................................................
................................................................................................................... 
2) Discuss the relationship between real assets and financial assets and
how they are disclosed in the balance sheet of the firm.
...................................................................................................................
...................................................................................................................
...................................................................................................................
...................................................................................................................
................................................................................................................... 


--- Page 45 ---
44 
The Financial System: 
Overview 3.4 THE NATIONAL ACCOUNTS  
The macroeconomic analysis is best known through the system of National 
Income Accounts. We have already learned concept related to National 
Income in macro economics let us briefly discuss them again. Production is 
measured in the economy and earnings are also measured that are derived 
from production.  
The concept of flow is classified into two: National Product and National 
Income which are used to measure the overall economic performance of the 
country.  
National income refers to the total income earned by a country’s residents. 
This comprises wages, salaries, profits, and rental income. It is computed by 
summing up all the income earned in a country during a given period, usually 
a year. A country’s economic well-being is measured by the national income 
which shows the capability of the residents to consume goods and services. 
National product, on the other hand, is the total value of all goods and 
services produced within a country’s borders in a given period, usually a 
year. It is computed by summing up the value of all final goods and services 
produced in a country, regardless of who produced them. National product 
comprehends both goods that are traded in the market and those that are 
meant for personal use, like homemade vegetables. National product is 
measured by Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and Gross National Product 
(GNP).  
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is a broad measure of the output of goods and 
services in an economy. It is generally the compilation of value-added output. 
GDP is measured either through the production side or through the 
consumption side. GDP is categorized into three sectors if measured through 
production i.e., agriculture, industry and services. However, from the 
consumption or expenditure point of view, GDP is the summation of private 
consumption, government consumption, investment and net exports.  
 Private Consumption: This is the amount spent by households on goods
and services, including durable goods (such as cars and appliances), non-
durable goods (such as food and clothing), and services (such as
healthcare and education).
 Investment expenditure: This is the amount spent by businesses on new
capital goods, such as machinery and buildings, as well as on research
and development.
 Government expenditure: This is the amount spent by the government on
goods and services, including public infrastructure, defence, and social
programs.
 Net exports:  This is the difference between a country’s exports (goods
and services sold to other countries) and its imports (goods and services


--- Page 46 ---
45 
Basic Business 
Accounting 
bought from other countries). A positive net export balance means a 
country is exporting more than it is importing, while a negative balance 
means it is importing more than it is exporting. 
GDP at factor cost by economic activity is adjusted by adding indirect taxes 
net of subsidies to arrive at estimated GDP at market prices so that it equals 
the expenditure on gross domestic product. The Gross National Product 
(GNP) at factor cost is arrived at by adding foreign income such as 
repatriated income, profits and loyalties from abroad to the GDP at factor 
cost.  
The Net National Product (NNP) is the net production of goods and services 
in a country during the year. It is simply the GNP adjusted for depreciation 
charges. The NNP gives a picture of the net increase in the total production 
of the country. It assists in the analysis of the long-run complexity of 
maintaining and enhancing the supply of physical capital in the country. 
3.5  FLOW OF FUNDS ACCOUNTS  
The Flow of Funds Accounts (FFA) is a macroeconomic tool which tracks 
the flow of funds within an economy. The FFA provides a widespread 
overview of the generation of funds and their distribution and utilization in an 
economy.  
The FFA is concentrated by the Federal Reserve System of the United States, 
and it comprises statistics on certain sectors of the economy, such as 
households, businesses, government, banking and financial institutions and 
the rest of the world. There is confined tracking regarding the movement of 
funds between these sectors through varied financial instruments, like stocks, 
bonds, and loans. 
The FFA is bifurcated into two main sections: the Asset and Liability section 
and the Transactions section. The Asset and Liability section gives detailed 
information on the financial assets and liabilities of each sector, while the 
Transactions section offers information on the financial transactions between 
the sectors. 
Some of the instances of information offered by FFA are as follows: 
1) Variation in the net worth of each sector.
2) The amount of credit outstanding in each sector.
3) The amount of equity outstanding in each sector.
4) The flow of funds between sectors, such as household savings being
invested in business or government securities.
5) The composition of the financial assets and liabilities of each sector,
such as the type of financial instruments held.


--- Page 47 ---
46 
The Financial System: 
Overview 
The FFA is an important macroeconomic tool for policymakers, researchers, 
analysts, and investors in recognizing the value of the financial structure of 
an economy and keeping track of the flow of funds between sectors. It can be 
used to explore potential areas of risk, monitor trends in investment patterns, 
and make policy judgements and decisions related to monetary and fiscal 
policy. 
Apart from sector-wise information, the flow of funds is also organized along 
the financial instruments dimension. The macroeconomic analysis 
instrument-wise shows the aggregate preference of various sectors for 
different financial instruments.  Financial claims are classified into two 
categories:  
 Primary Issues or Direct Securities which incorporates all kinds of debt,
marketable or issued by borrowers.
 Secondary Issues or Indirect Securities which incorporates debt and
claims issued by financial intermediaries to acquire primary securities.
The total flow of finance is the sum of funds lifted by primary and secondary 
issues. 
Flow of Funds-based Indicators of Financial Development 
Goldsmith (1969) designed some ratios which contributed to understanding 
the role of financial development in the country. These ratios are termed 
financial deepening ratios.  
Finance Ratio:  This ratio indicates the financial structure of economic 
growth. This is defined as the total financial claims i.e., both primary issues 
and secondary issues divided by the national income.  
FR = 
்௢௧௔௟ ி௜௡௔௡௖௜௔௟ ஼௟௔௜௠௦
ே௔௧௜௢௡௔௟ ூ௡௖௢௠௘  
Financial Inter-Relation Ratio (FIR):  This ratio is the indicator of financial 
issues regarding capital formation of the economy. This demonstrates the 
relationship between financial structure and the real asset structure of an 
economy.  
FIR = 
ி௜௡௔௡௖௜௔௟ ஺௦௦௘௧௦ (்௢௧௔௟ ூ௦௦௨௘௦ )
௉௛௬௦௜௖௔௟ ஺௦௦௘௧௦ (ே௘௧ ஽௢௠௘௦௧௜௖ ஼௔௣௜௧௔௟ ி௢௥௠௔௧௜௢௡ )
New Issue Ratio (NIR):  It is the proportion of primary issues to net domestic 
capital formation. This implies how primary or direct issues to the savers 
have financed the investment by the investing sectors.  
NIR = 
௉௥௜௠௔௥௬ ூ௦௦௨௘௦ 
ே௘௧ ௉௛௬௦௜௖௔௟ ூ௡௩௘௦௧௠௘௡௧௦ (ே௘௧ ஽௢௠௘௦௧௜௖ ஼௔௣௜௧௔௟ ி௢௥௠௔௧௜௢௡ )
Intermediation Ratio (IR):  It is the indicator of secondary issues to primary 
issues and provides the significance of financial intermediaries in channelling 
