--- Page 11 ---
 
 
10 
The Financial System: 
Overview UNIT 1  ECONOMIC AGENTS 
Structure   
1.0 Objectives  
1.1 Introduction 
1.2      The Nature of Financial System 
 1.2.1 Financial Institution 
 1.2.2 Financial Markets 
 1.2.3 Financial Instruments 
 1.2.4 Financial Services 
1.3 Participants in Financial Markets 
1.4  Financial Markets 
 1.4.1 Types of Financial Markets 
 1.4.2 Importance and Functions of Financial Markets 
1.5  Financial Instruments 
 1.5.1 Types of Financial Instruments 
1.6 Let Us Sum Up  
1.7 Key Words 
1.8 Some Useful References 
1.9 Answers/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
1.0 OBJECTIVES 
After going through this unit, you will be able to: 
 Explain the concept and features of financial system; 
 Describe types of financial institutions, financial markets, financial 
instruments;  
 Discuss the functions of financial institutions and markets; 
 Highlight the importance of financial institutions; and  
 Recognise different financial instruments and analyse the need for 
regulating financial institutions. 
1.1 INTRODUCTION  
You must have read in Microeconomics that economic agents are 
individuals or entities that participate in economic activities by making 
choices, engaging in transactions, and influencing the allocation of 
resources in an economy. The main economic agents are households, 
 


--- Page 12 ---
11 
Economic Agents firms, government, financial institutions etc. These economic agents 
interact with each other in markets. They influence demand and supply, 
prices and overall functioning of the economy. In this unit, we will 
discuss the main economic agents in the context of financial markets and 
institutions. For example, households play an important role in financial 
markets principally as savers and also as borrowers. They save money by 
depositing it in banks or investing in various financial instruments like 
savings accounts, bonds, stocks etc. At the same time, they also borrow 
money for various purposes like buying a house, car etc. Similarly, firms 
act as borrowers and investors, financial institutions act as intermediaries, 
and the government as regulator and participant in financial activity in the 
economy. 
The economic agents collectively influence the flow of money, credit, and 
investments in financial markets. This in turn impacts interest rates, asset 
prices, and overall economic stability.  
Consider if you were to start a business that manufactures special 
equipment for persons with disabilities which ease their day-to-day 
functioning, but you have no funds to invest in this special equipment. At 
the same time, there is Raj who has inherited a huge amount of money 
and wants to invest it in some business. If you and Raj could get together, 
both of you could be in a win-win situation where you get to have funds 
for your business and Raj is able to invest his idle money. In this 
example, both you and Raj are economic agents. Financial markets (bond 
and stock markets) and financial intermediaries (banks, insurance 
companies, and pension funds) have the basic function of getting people 
such as you and Raj together by moving funds from those who have a 
surplus of funds (Raj) to those who have a shortage of funds (you). 
Financial institutions, financial markets, financial services, financial 
instruments, financial practices and financial transactions together form 
the Financial System. The term financial institutions refer to all kinds of 
entities which intermediate and facilitate financial transactions of both 
individual and corporate clients. Essentially, financial institutions are the 
intermediaries between the savers and borrowers of the money. They 
transfer financial resources from the savers to the investors or borrowers. 
Financial institutions have several functions that assist the economic agent in 
fulfilling their various needs. They deal in all types of finance-related 
businesses thus playing a crucial role in the economy.  
There are different types of financial institutions: banking and non-banking. 
The function of these institutions is different and they provide different 
services and have different levels of risk associated with it. In this unit, we 
will explore mainly the functions, roles, and types of financial institutions, 
financial markets and financial instruments. 


--- Page 13 ---
 
 
12 
The Financial System: 
Overview 1.2  THE NATURE OF FINANCIAL SYSTEM 
A financial system is a complex, well-integrated set of sub-systems of 
financial institutions, markets, instruments, and services which facilitate the 
transfer and allocation of funds, efficiently and effectively between different 
economic agents.   
There are four constituents of a financial system, viz. (i) financial institutions, 
(ii) financial markets, (iii) financial instruments, and (iv) financial services. 
1.2.1 Financial Institutions 
Financial institutions are business organisations that act as mobilisers and 
depositors of savings and as purveyors of credit or finance.  They also 
provide various financial services to the community. 
Financial institutions have been variously classified.  Two important 
classifications are as follows: 
A) Banking institutions and non-banking institutions 
B) Intermediaries and non-intermediaries. 
A) Banking Institutions and Non-banking institutions 
 The banking institutions have quite a few things in common with the 
non-banking ones, but their distinguishing character lies in the fact that, 
unlike other institutions, (i) they participate in the economy’s payments 
mechanism, i.e., they provide transactions services, (ii) their deposit 
liabilities constitute a major part of the national money supply, and (iii) 
they can, as a whole, create deposits or credit which is money.  The 
distinction between the two has been highlighted by Sayers by 
characterizing the former as “creators” of credit, and the latter as 
“purveyors” of credit. 
B) Intermediaries and non-intermediaries 
 Intermediaries intermediate between savers and investors; they lend 
money as well as mobilise savings; their liabilities are towards the 
ultimate savers, while their assets are from the investors or borrowers. 
Non-intermediary institutions are in the lending business but their 
resources are not directly obtained from the savers. All banking 
institutions are intermediaries, many non-banking institutions also act 
as intermediaries and when they do so they are known as non-banking 
financial intermediaries. Some examples of non-banking financial 
intermediaries include mutual funds, investment funds, insurance 
companies, and pension funds. These institutions provide a valuable 
alternative to traditional bank financing. 
 


--- Page 14 ---
13 
Economic Agents 1.2.2 Financial Markets 
Financial markets are a mechanism enabling participants to deal with 
financial claims.  The markets also provide a facility in which their demands 
and requirements interact to set a price for such claims.  The participants on 
the demand and supply sides of these markets are financial institutions, 
agents, brokers, dealers, borrowers, lenders, savers, and others who are 
interlinked by the laws, contracts, covenants and communications networks. 
Financial markets have been variously classified.  Two important 
classifications are A. Primary market and secondary market and 
B. Money market and Capital market.  We will discuss about financial 
markets in details in section 1.4. 
1.2.3 Financial Instruments 
A financial instrument is a claim against a person or an institution for the 
payment at a future date of a sum of money and/or a periodic payment in the 
form of interest or dividend.  The term ‘and/or’ implies that either of the 
payments will be sufficient but both of them may be promised. We will 
discuss more about financial instruments in section 1.5. 
1.2.4 Financial Services 
Financial intermediaries provide key financial services such as merchant 
banking, leasing, hire purchase, credit rating, etc.  Financial services rendered 
by financial intermediaries bridge the gap between lack of knowledge and 
information on the part of investors and their participation in financial 
markets and working with increasingly sophisticated financial instruments. 
Some of the important functions of Financial Services are: 
1) Facilitating Transactions: Enabling the exchange of goods and services
within the economy.
2) Mobilizing Savings: Gathering savings that would otherwise have
limited investment opportunities.
3) Allocating Capital: Directing capital funds to finance productive
investments.
4) Monitoring Management:  Ensuring that allocated funds are used as
intended.
Financial service institutions provide a diverse range of services to cater to 
the needs of individual users. Some of them are: 
1) Provision of funds:
a) Venture capital
b) Banking services
c) Asset financing


--- Page 15 ---
14 
The Financial System: 
Overview 
d) Trade financing
e) Credit cards
2) Managing investible funds:
a) Portfolio management
b) Merchant banking
c) Mutual and pension funds
3) Risk financing:
a) Project preparatory services
b) Insurance
c) Export credit guarantee
4) Consultancy services:
a) Project preparatory services
b) Project appraisal
c) Business advisory services
d) Valuation of investments
e) Credit rating
f) Merger and acquisition.
As discussed above, the financial services provided by these intermediaries 
close the gap between investors’ lack of knowledge and their involvement in 
financial markets. This helps to facilitate informed decision-making and 
promotes effective engagement with increasingly sophisticated financial 
instruments. 
1.3 PARTICIPANTS IN FINANCIAL MARKETS  
The important participants in financial markets are business firms, investors, 
brokers, speculators, hedgers, and arbitrageurs. Firms use stock and bond 
markets to raise capital from investors; speculators look up to various asset 
classes to make directional bets on future prices; hedgers use derivatives 
markets to mitigate various risks; and arbitrageurs seek to take advantage of 
mispricing or anomalies observed across various markets. Brokers often act 
as mediators that bring buyers and sellers together, earning a commission or 
fee for their services. They are third parties that facilitate trades between 
buyers and sellers but who do not take an actual position in a stock. 
In a stock market, retail and institutional investors, traders, as well as market 
makers (MMs) and specialists take part and maintain liquidity and provide 
two-sided markets. 


--- Page 16 ---
 
 
15 
Economic Agents There are two important participants, first, those who have excess funds (the 
savers), and those who need funds (the borrowers). Bringing these two parties 
together are financial institutions and financial markets. The participants in 
the financial system deal in exchange of money, capital, assets, and 
securities. Financial institutions work in tandem with each other to create a 
fully interdependent financial system. The importance of financial institutions 
lies in the fact that they provide services which lead to a smooth functioning 
of the financial system. 
The financial institutions play the following role in 
the economic development of the country: 
1) Help to form financial resources through mobilization of savings of 
the households, corporate and the public sector.  
2) Channelise resources or investments to economic agents in different 
sectors of an economy: agriculture, manufacturing and services for 
cultivation of land, production of goods and provision of services.  
3) Meet short and long-term financial needs.  
4) Banking institutions multiply the monetary resources by the process 
of credit creation.  
5) Transfer surplus funds from one part of the economy to another 
keeping in mind the national priorities and the market demand.  
6) Encourage people to divert their physical assets into financial 
assets and make that available for growth of production, trade and 
commerce.
 
7) Provide a variety of financial assets to suit the different needs of 
investing public and corporate.  
8) Facilitates mechanisms to control the risks and address uncertainties 
for the stability of the financial system. They reduce the risk of 
capital loss through diversification of funds to different industries.  
9) Encourage entrepreneurial skills and assist with new projects. 
10) Help accelerate the process of economic growth of the country. 
11) Enable better decision-making.  
12) Make financial resources available to the Government.  
In this context, it is worthwhile to remember the recession of 2008-09 which 
underscores the importance of financial institutions to the economy. 
Businesses, for instance, depend on financial institutions for money. When 
they can’t get it, production does not expand or may even be curtailed, 
unemployment rises, mortgage and other credit defaults increase, and people 
and businesses stop spending money, which reduces income for other people 
and businesses, and reduces tax revenue for governments, which causes them 
to cut spending, which causes more unemployment, etc. This is why 
governments around the world injected trillions of money into their financial 


--- Page 17 ---
16 
The Financial System: 
Overview 
institutions during the recession to prevent their collapse and the subsequent 
stalling of the economy. Indeed, financial system with its institutions is the 
plumbing system of the economy and when it freezes or gets blocked the flow 
of money in the economy gets affected, undermining economic activity. 
It is 
desirable therefore to take all such measures that ensure the stability of 
the financial system in an economy to take proper measures.  
Financial institutions serve most people in some way, as financial operations 
are a critical part of any economy, with individuals and companies relying 
on financial institutions for transactions and investing. They develop the 
financial securities and provide the financial markets where lenders, 
borrowers, investors, speculators, and hedgers can exchange money for future 
payments in the form of interest, for ownership interests, such as stocks, for 
the payment of future contingent claims, such as with options and derivatives, 
and for sharing risk, such as the pooling of insurance premiums for financial 
protection. 
Thus, financial institutions allow the exchange of funds 
between lenders, investors, and borrowers, the more efficiently this works 
the better it is for an economy.  
1.4 FINANCIAL MARKETS 
As discussed earlier, financial market is referred to a space, where the selling 
and buying of financial assets and securities take place. As noted, the trade of 
buying and selling securities, derivatives, commodities, forex,  etc. is carried 
on in financial markets. Banks, financial institutions, insurance companies, 
mutual funds, pension trusts etc. are participants in financial markets. 
Financial markets (bonds and stocks), instruments (derivatives, bank CDs, 
and futures), and institutions (banks, pension funds, insurance companies, 
and mutual funds) give investors the opportunities to choose specific services 
that meet their needs. Financial markets and financial institutions together 
contribute to economic growth. Financial markets are vital for the smooth 
operation of modern economies.  
Financial market is a term used to denote the total infrastructure which 
facilitates the trade of financial securities . Examples of financial securities 
are currency, bonds, stocks, derivatives, commodities, forex etc . Businesses 
and investors can go to financial markets to raise money to grow their 
businesses and to make more money, respectively. They rely heavily on 
informational transparency to ensure that the markets set prices that are 
efficient and appropriate. The market prices of securities may not be 
indicative of their intrinsic value because of macroeconomic forces like the 
monetary and fiscal policies of the government.   
The financial markets are broad in scope and scale. Despite covering many 
different asset classes and having various structures and regulations, all 
financial markets work essentially by bringing together buyers and sellers in 


--- Page 18 ---
 
 
17 
Economic Agents some asset or contract and allowing them to trade with one another. This is 
often done through an auction or price discovery mechanism. 
The important participants in financial markets are intermediaries like banks, 
brokers, custodians, depositories, etc. Without intermediaries, the financial 
market cannot run seamlessly and efficiently. They are agencies which work 
in an assisting role. They execute the function of fund collection from 
lenders, and disbursement of capital to borrowers. They also handle financial 
securities like stocks, mutual fund units, bonds, deposit certificates etc., on 
behalf of the lender and borrowers.  
Equilibrium in financial markets is usually determined by assuming that there 
is perfect competition, and by using the well-known tools of demand and 
supply. Equilibrium in financial markets is established when the expected 
demand for funds (credit) for short-term and long-term investments matches 
with the planned supply of funds generated out of saving and credit creation.  
In other words, the equality of total desired borrowing with the total desired 
lending is necessary for establishing an equilibrium rate of interest. 
1.4.1 Types of Financial Markets 
There are different types of financial markets. They are discussed as follows:   
 Over the Counter (OTC) Market:  They manage public stock exchange 
dealing usually with small companies that can be traded cheaply and 
have less regulation. 
 Bond Market: A bond market is a place where investors loan money on 
bonds as a security for a set of times at a predefined rate of interest. 
Bonds are issued by governments, corporations, states, municipalities, 
etc. 
 Money Market:  They trade in products with highly liquid short-term 
maturities (of less than one year) and are characterized by a high degree 
of safety and a relatively low return on interest. At the wholesale level, 
the money markets involve low-volume trades between institutions and 
traders. At the retail level, they include money market mutual funds 
bought by individual investors and money market accounts opened by 
bank customers. Individuals may also invest in the money markets by 
buying short-term papers. 
 Derivatives Market: A derivative is a contract between two or more 
parties whose value is based on an agreed-upon underlying financial 
asset (like a security) or set of assets (like an index). Derivatives are 
secondary securities whose value is solely derived from the value of the 
primary security that they are linked to. In and of itself a derivative is 
worthless. Rather than trading stocks directly, a derivatives market trades 
in futures and options contracts , and other advanced financial products, 


--- Page 19 ---
18 
The Financial System: 
Overview 
that derive their value from underlying instruments like bonds, 
commodities, currencies, interest rates, market indexes, and stocks.  
Future markets are where future contracts are listed and traded. Unlike 
forwards, which trade OTC, futures markets utilize standardized contract 
specifications, are well-regulated, and utilize clearing houses to settle 
and confirm trades. Options markets list and regulate options contracts. 
Both futures and options exchanges may list contracts on various asset 
classes, such as equities, fixed-income securities, commodities, and so 
on. 
 Commodities Markets are venues where producers and consumers meet
to exchange physical commodities such as agricultural products (e.g.,
corn, livestock, soybeans), energy products (oil, gas, carbon credits),
precious metals (gold, silver, platinum), or “soft commodities” (such as
cotton, coffee, and sugar). The bulk of trading in these commodities
takes place in spot markets, where physical goods are exchanged for
money. Forwards, futures, and options on commodities are exchanged
both OTC and on listed exchanges around the world.
 The Forex Market is the market in which participants can buy, sell,
hedge, and speculate on the exchange rates between currency pairs. The
forex market is the most liquid in the world, as cash is the most liquid of
assets. The forex market is also decentralized and consists of a global
network of computers and brokers from around the world. The forex
market is made up of banks, commercial companies, central banks,
investment management firms, hedge funds, and retail forex brokers and
investors.
 Cryptocurrency Markets : Since 2009, the world has seen the
introduction and rise of cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin and Ethereum.
They are decentralized digital assets that are based on blockchain
technology. Hundreds of cryptocurrency tokens are available and traded
globally across a patchwork of independent online crypto exchanges.
These exchanges host digital wallets for traders to swap one
cryptocurrency for another, or fiat monies such as dollars or euros.
Because the majority of crypto exchanges are centralised platforms,
users are susceptible to hacks or fraud. Decentralized exchanges are also
available that operate without any central authority. These exchanges
allow direct peer-to-peer (P2P) trading of digital currencies without the
need for an actual exchange authority to facilitate the transactions.
Futures and options trading are also available on major cryptocurrencies.
Having this backdrop of types of financial markets, they can be further 
classified based on their nature of transactions: 
1) Nature of Claim:
a) Debt Market where fixed bonds and debentures are exchanged
between investors.


--- Page 20 ---
 
 
19 
Economic Agents b) Equity Market is a place for investors to deal with equity. 
2)  Maturity of Claim:  
a) Money Market deals with short-term funds such as a certificate of 
deposits, treasury bills, and commercial papers, etc. which mature 
within twelve months.   
b) Capital Market trades medium and long-term financial assets, that is, 
securities having a maturity period of one year or more. 
3)  Timing of Delivery: 
a) Cash Market is a marketplace where trade is completed in real-time. 
b) Futures Market where the delivery or compensation of products is 
taken in the future specified date. 
4)  Organizational Structure: 
a) The exchange-traded Market has a centralised system with a 
patterned procedure. 
b) Over-the-Counter Market has a decentralised organization with 
customised procedures. 
5) Nature of transaction 
a) The primary markets deal in new financial claims or new securities, 
and, therefore, they are also known as ‘new issue markets’. They 
mobilize savings and they supply fresh or additional capital to 
business units. 
b) Secondary markets deal in securities already issued or existing or 
outstanding. They do not contribute directly to the supply of 
additional capital; they do so indirectly by rendering securities 
issued on the primary market liquid. 
6) Regulation status 
a) Unorganized financial market is old Indigenous market mainly made 
of indigenous bankers, money lenders etc.  
b) Organized financial market comes under the regulatory purview of 
RBI and SEBI. 
1.4.2  Importance and Functions of Financial Markets 
The financial market allocates limited resources to the nation’s economy. 
Without them, capital cannot be allocated efficiently. Economic activity such 
as commerce and trade, investment, and production would be greatly 
diminished. The financial market enables efficient trade of securities, and 
transfer of funds, between lenders and borrowers. It is the financial market 
which creates securities for investment. People who have surplus funds invest 
