--- Page 1 ---
MEC - 110
MONEY  FINANCIAL 
INSTITUTIONS & MARKETS
VOLUME-I
BANK


--- Page 2 ---
MEC-110
School of Social Sciences
Indira Gandhi National Open University
New Delhi
Money, Financial
Institutions and Markets
(Volume-1)


--- Page 3 ---
EXPERT COMMITTEE
COURSE PREPAREATION TEAM
Block/       Unit Title Unit Writers
Unit No.
BLOCK 1  THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM: OVERVIEW
Unit 1 Economic Agents Sh. Saugato Sen
Associate Professor of Economics
Indira Gandhi National Open
University, New Delhi
Unit 2 Financial Intermediation Sh. Saugato Sen
Associate Professor of Economics
Indira Gandhi National Open
University, New Delhi
Unit 3 Basic Business Accounting Dr. Ekta Kharbanda,
Assistant Professor, Delhi Skill and
Entrepreneurship University
New Delhi
Prof. Atul Sarma (Retd.)
Former Director
Indian Statistical Institute
New Delhi
Prof. Indrani Roy Chowdhury
CSRD, School of Social Sciences
Jawaharlal Nehru University
New Delhi
Prof. Prem S.Vashistha
Former Director, Agro
Economic Research Centre
Delhi School of Economics
University of Delhi
New Delhi
Prof. Subrata Guha
CESP, School of Social Sciences
Jawaharlal Nehru University
New Delhi
Dr. Rajeev Malhotra
Professor & Executive Director
OP Jindal Global University
Gurugram, Haryana
Prof. Kaustuva Barik
Indira Gandhi National
Open University
New Delhi
Prof. B S Prakash
Indira Gandhi National
Open University
New Delhi
Sh. Saugato Sen
Associate Professor of
Economics, Indira Gandhi
National Open University
New Delhi
Dr. Vijeta Banwari
Associate Professor of
Economics, Indira Gandhi
National Open University
New Delhi
Dr. Nidhi Tewathia
Associate Professor of
Economics
Ambedkar University
New Delhi
Prof. Narayan Prasad
(Convener)
Indira Gandhi National
Open University
New Delhi
PROGRAMME COORDINATORS
Prof. Narayan Prasad
Professor of Economics
School of Social Sciences
IGNOU, New Delhi
Dr. Vijeta Banwari
Associate Professor
School of Social Sciences
IGNOU, New Delhi
COURSE COORDINATOR
Dr. Vijeta Banwari, Associate Professor
School of Social Sciences, IGNOU
New Delhi
COURSE EDITORS FORMAT AND LANGUAGE EDITING
Prof. Rajeev Malhotra (Block 1,2,3)
Prof. Narayan Prasad (Block 4)
Dr. Vijeta Banwari
Associate Professor
School of Social Sciences, IGNOU
New Delhi


--- Page 4 ---
BLOCK 2  MONEY
Unit 4 Role of Money in Modern Economy Dr. Vijeta Banwari
Associate Professor, IGNOU
New Delhi
Unit 5 Demand for Money Dr. Sant Kumar
Assistant Professor of Economics
Vivekanand Institute of Professional
Studies, New Delhi
Unit 6 Money Supply Dr. Apica Sharma
Researcher
Department of Revenue, Ministry of
Finance, Government of India
BLOCK 3  MONETARY POLICY
Unit 7 Central Bank: Its Role in Monetary Policy Prof. S.K. Singh, Retd.
Prof. of Economics, IGNOU
New Delhi
Unit 8 Central Bank: Its Role as Regulator of the Dr. Sant Kumar
Banking System Assistant Professor of Economics
Vivekanand Institute of Professional
Studies, New Delhi
Unit 9 Monetary Policy in India: Transmission Dr. Apica Sharma
Mechanism Researcher
Department of Revenue, Ministry of
Finance, Government of India
BLOCK 4   FINANCIAL MARKETS
Unit 10 Money Markets Prof. S.K. Singh, Retd. Prof. of
Economics, IGNOU, New Delhi
Unit 11 Capital Markets Prof. S.K. Singh, Retd. Prof. of
Economics, IGNOU, New Delhi
Unit 12 Bond Markets Dr. Sant Kumar
Assistant Professor of Economics
Vivekanand Institute of Professional
Studies, New Delhi
Unit 13 Derivatives Dr. Sant Kumar
Assistant Professor of Economics
Vivekanand Institute of Professional
Studies, New Delhi
August, 2024
 Indira Gandhi National Open University, 2024
ISBN :
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced in any form, by mimeograph or any other
means, without permission in writing from the Indira Gandhi National Open University.
Further information about the School of Social Sciences and the Indira Gandhi National Open
University courses may be obtained from the University’ s office at Maidan Garhi, New Delhi-110 068.
or visit the University website http://www.ignou.ac.in.
Printed and published on behalf of the Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi by the The
Registrar, MPDD, IGNOU, New Delhi.
Photographs/diagrams/maps/drawings and other academic materials and text used in this course for
academic purposes are gratefully acknowledged and credited. Should any infringement have occurred,
the publishers and editors apologise and will be pleased to make the necessary corrections in future
editions of this book.
Laser Typesetting : Akashdeep Printers, 20-Ansari Road, Daryaganj, New Delhi-110002
Printed at :
PRINT  PRODUCTION
Mr. Tilak Raj
Assistant Registrar,
MPDD, IGNOU, New Delhi


--- Page 5 ---


--- Page 6 ---
Course Contents
Pages
COURSE  INTRODUCTION 7
BLOCK 1  THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM: OVERVIEW 9
Unit 1 Economic Agents 10
Unit 2 Financial Intermediation 25
Unit 3 Basic Business Accounting 38
BLOCK 2  MONEY 57
Unit 4 Role of Money in Modern Economy 58
Unit 5 Demand for Money 72
Unit 6 Money Supply 93
BLOCK 3  MONETARY POLICY 109
Unit 7 Central Bank: Its Role in Monetary Policy 110
Unit 8 Central Bank: Its Role as Regulator of the Banking System 132
Unit 9 Monetary Policy in India: Transmission Mechanism 149
BLOCK 4  FINANCIAL MARKETS 171
Unit 10 Money Markets 172
Unit 11 Capital Markets 192
Unit 12 Bond Markets 209
Unit 13 Derivatives 230


--- Page 7 ---
6
Overview of Occupational
Health


--- Page 8 ---
7
Occupational Health:
Meaning and ConceptCOURSE   INTRODUCTION
MEC 110: Money, Financial Institutions and Markets
The structure of MA Economics programme has been spread over four semesters. In
each of the first three semesters, three courses (in the multiple of six or eight credits)
have been included in a well thought manner. The two courses i.e., Micro Economic
Analysis (MEC-101) and Macro Economic Analysis (MEC-102) provide the theoretical
foundation and the knowledge of mathematical and statistical tools in MEC 203, enabling
to understand micro and macro theories in analytical manner. Another set of three
courses included in semester two lead to further insight into the area of growth and
development. The knowledge of economic theory both in micro and macro domain
and insight into growth and development prepare the foundation for entering the empirical
part and take up the various components of Indian economics policy (MEC-205).
Knowledge of theoretical and applied part of economics make a solid ground for
making in-depth study of various economic events, developments and situations.
However, before taking up in-depth study, the knowledge of conceptual foundation,
tools and techniques of research methodology is required. These have been provided
in the course Research Methods in Economics (MEC 109).
Having the knowledge of core courses in the first and the second semesters, with the
intention to have knowledge of area specific core courses, another set of three courses
viz., Public Economics (MEC-106) International Trade and Development (MEC-107)
and Money, Financial Institutions and Markets (MEC 110) have been introduced in
the third semester.
We have covered issues related to monetary policy in macro-economic analysis, yet
the various topics related to monetary economics such as functions of money and its
relation and interaction with financial institutions and markets could not be covered,
which are otherwise essential to have insight into the functioning of various kinds of
markets in the economy . Hence, MEC 110 course as an extension of macro dimension
of economics has been included in this semester.
In order to comprehend this course in a meaningful manner, students should have a
clear idea of the conceptual foundations and functioning of the financial system. In this
process, it is necessary to understand the role and functions of money, and the
transmission mechanism of monetary policy .
This course is extremely relevant because money, financial institutions, and markets
form the cornerstone of modern economies. They serve as the channels through which
resources are allocated, transactions are facilitated, and economic prosperity is achieved.
Their roles are multifaceted and intertwined, shaping the economic landscape and
impacting the lives of individuals, businesses, and societies around the globe. Thus,
understanding functions of money , financial institutions, and markets, interactions, and
implications is essential for policymakers, economists, investors, and citizens alike,
helping them to navigate the complexities of the financial system.
The course discusses how capital flows through the economy and how financial
intermediaries play a crucial role in channelling funds between surplus and deficit units
in the economy. It deliberates upon the roles, functions, and regulatory frameworks of
money markets, capital markets, bond markets, and derivatives. It also provides insights
into market dynamics, participant behaviour, and factors driving asset valuations. The


--- Page 9 ---
8
Overview of Occupational
Health
course also delves into functioning of Commercial banks, non-bank financial
intermediaries, and regulatory bodies which form the backbone of the financial system
and play an important role in maintaining economic stability .  Further, it equips with the
understanding of ‘Efficient Portfolio Frontier’ and asset pricing theories which are
essential for investors seeking to optimize returns and manage risk. To understand the
challenges and complexities of maintaining a stable financial system, this course also
presents the comprehensive understanding of non-performing assets, foreign exchange
stability , and behavioural finance.
This course is divided into eight blocks. Each block is interconnected. The structure of
the course is as follows:
Block 1: The Financial System is a foundational block. This block has 3 units. It
provides an overview of the financial system, elucidating the interlinkages between
economic agents, markets, and institutions. It also gives an overview of the process of
flow of funds, the role of financial intermediaries, and the fundamentals of basic business
accounting, setting the stage for a deeper understanding of Money , financial institutions
and markets.
Block 2 entitled Money contains three units. This block unravels significance of money
in the modern economy. From understanding its functions and liquidity to exploring
theories of demand for money and the process of money supply, this block gives
insights into Money as a fundamental building block of monetary systems.
In Block 3: Monetary Policy, we have discussed the pivotal role that the Central
Bank plays in shaping monetary policy and presented their functions, objectives, and
instruments. Three units have been covered in this block which explores the transmission
mechanisms of monetary policy and analyze its implications on financial institutions and
markets.
Block 4: Financial Markets deals with the functioning of the financial market. Its
content is spread over four units. The intricacies of money markets, capital markets,
bond markets, and derivatives, throwing light on their functions, participants, and
dynamics have been discussed in this block.


--- Page 10 ---
9 
Economic Agents 
Block 1 
The Financial System: Overview 
Unit 1 Economic Agents 
Unit 2 Financial Intermediation 
Unit 3 Basic Business Accounting 
