--- Page 1 ---
 
 
 
53 
Intra-Industry 
Trade  
 
 
 
BLOCK 2 
 
 
MODERN THEORIES OF  
INTERNATIONAL TRADE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Unit 3 Intra-Industry Trade 
Unit 4 Alternative Explanations of Trade 


--- Page 2 ---
 
 
 
54 
Modern Theories of  
International Trade BLOCK INTRODUCTION 
This block presents the modern theories of International Trade. It discusses the need, rational 
and measurement of Intra-Industry Trade (IIT). This block also elucidates the extensions of 
classical trade theories with more realistic assumptions which explain the current patterns of 
international trade in the world market. This block comprises of two units. 
Unit 3 Intra-Industry Trade (IIT) deliberates on the phenomena of intra-industry trade and 
identifies the need for a different theory for intra-industry trade. The two types of IIT – 
horizontal and vertical IIT are also elaborated in this Unit. The unit also explained „love of 
variety‟ and „ideal variety‟ approach in the Intra -Industry trade. Possible reasons behind IIT 
in identical products are also discussed in this unit. The unit also presents the Grubel Lloyd 
(GL) index to measure the intensity of IIT. 
Unit 4  Alternative Explanations of International Trade  Theories sheds light on new, 
complementary trade theories based on real world situations using the concepts of Economies 
of Scale, Imperfect Competition, Product differentiation and Technological Gap. This unit 
probe the effect of relaxing each of the classical and Heckscher-Ohlin trade theory 
assumptions on International trade. It critically examines the impact of Logistics cost and 
environmental standards on the world trade.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  


--- Page 3 ---
 
 
 
55 
Intra-Industry 
Trade UNIT 3  INTRA-INDUSTRY TRADE  
Structure 
3.0 Objectives 
3.1 Introduction 
3.2   Trade Liberalization and the Phenomenon of Intra-Industry Trade 
3.3 Theory of Intra-Industry Trade   
         3.3.1 Need for a Separate Theory of Intra-Industry 
         3.3.2  IIT in Horizontally Differentiated Commodities 
         3.3.3  IIT in Vertically Differentiated Commodities 
         3.3.4  IIT in Intermediate Products 
         3.3.5  IIT in Identical Commoditi es 
3.4   Measurement of IIT 
         3.4.1  Defining `Industry‟ and the Problem of Categorical Aggregation 
      3.4.2  Measuring the Intensity of IIT 
3.5  Lets Sum Up 
3.6  References 
3.7 Answers/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
3.0  OBJECTIVES 
After studying this Unit, you should be able to:  
 describe the meaning of Intra-Industry trade; 
 distinguish between horizontal and vertical Intra-Industry trade; 
 identify the need for a separate theory for Intra-Industry trade; 
 explain the „love of variety‟ and „ideal variety‟ approach in Intra -Industry 
trade; 
 elucidate Intra-Industry trade in Horizontally and vertically differentiated 
Commodities; 
 list the major problems in measurement of intensity of Intra-Industry trade ; 
and 
 measure intensity of Intra-Industry trade using the Grubel Lloyd (GL) index. 
                                                 
 Contributed by  Prof. C Veeramani, Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research, Mumbai 


--- Page 4 ---
 
 
 
56 
Modern Theories of  
International Trade 3.1   INTRODUCTION 
We have already discussed in the previous unit about the gains from international 
trade i.e., the various benefits a country derives from trading goods and services 
with other countries. Each trading country gains when the total output increases 
due to the division of labour and specialisation. This unit will discuss the 
phenomena of intra-industry trade and why there is a need for a different theory 
for intra-industry trade. Greater specialisation in the manufacturing of unique 
varieties or product lines by individual plants in different countries has led to the 
tremendous growth of IIT. In order to exploit economies of scale in production, 
individual plants specialize in unique variety and thus leading to growth of IIT. 
Further, greater specialization at the level of distinct components used in an 
industry has promoted IIT in intermediate goods. In this unit, we will also discuss 
about the two types of IIT –
 horizontal and vertical IIT. Horizontal IIT is the 
simultaneous export and import of differentiated products within an industry of a 
similar quality. Vertical IIT, on the other hand, refers to the exchange of 
differentiated products of different qualities.  
We will also discuss „love of variety‟ and „ideal variety‟ approach in the Intra -
Industry trade. We will further discuss the possible reasons behind IIT in 
identical products. 
Two major issues in the empirical analysis of IIT are concerned with: i) the 
definition of „industry‟ an d ii) measurement of IIT. We will discuss about these 
issues along with the Grubel Lloyd (GL) index to measure the intensity of IIT.  
3.2  TRADE LIBERALIZATION AND THE 
PHENOMENON OF INTRA-INDUSTRY TRADE 
Mercantilism Trade liberalisation is expected to rationalise the choice of product 
lines by individual plants in domestic industries. Production and export of all 
varieties in a given industry become impossible if economies of scale in 
production are to be reaped.  Suppose the products in an industry are 
differentiated and each is manufactured with increasing returns to scale. In that 
case, a country may specialise in producing a subset of varieties for home 
consumption and export, while importing those varieties that are not supplied 
domestically. In this context, it becomes important to understand the structure of 
exports in its relation to imports within the industry. For understanding this 
dimension of trade pattern, trade economists have evolved the concept of intra-
industry trade (henceforth IIT), which means the simultaneous occurrence of 
exports and imports within the same industry . To be more precise, IIT means 
the simultaneous export and import of products, which are very close substitutes 
for each other in terms of factor inputs and consumption. 
Growth of IIT is an outcome of greater specialisation in the manufacturing of 
unique varieties or product lines by the individual plants in different countries.  


--- Page 5 ---
 
 
 
57 
Intra-Industry 
Trade Because there are fixed costs associated with the production of each variety, it is 
imperative that each plant specializes in a unique variety if economies of scale in 
production are to be exploited.  Therefore, the firms in each country would 
manufacture a subset of the varieties within an industry for meeting home 
demand and export.  At the same time, the varieties that are not produced within 
the country will be imported to meet the domestic demand.  This leads to the 
occurrence of IIT in final consumer goods.  Further, greater specialization at the 
level of distinct components used in an industry will promote IIT in intermediate 
goods. 
The phenomenon of IIT began to gain sustained interest since the early 1960s, 
after the formation of the European Economic Community (EEC). The 
conventional wisdom is that competition would induce a process of resource 
reallocation from the import competing industries to those industries where the 
country has comparative advantages.  It follows that a natural consequence of 
trade liberalization is the expansion of inter industry trade –
 that is, export 
increase from one set of industries and import increase in another. Further, it is 
held that trade liberalization invariably involves adjustment costs as some 
domestic industries may go out of business.  
However, a number of studies in the context of different countries suggest that 
trade liberalization biases the country‟s trade expansion towards IIT rather than 
inter industry trade. In other words, the pattern of specialisation was not the one 
whereby different countries specialised in different products. Instead, different 
countries tended to specialise in different types of a given product and there was 
an expansion of exports from practically every industry rather than the demise of 
inefficient manufacturing industries.  
In a liberalized environment, different countries would specialise in different 
types of a given product and there could be expansion of exports from practically 
every industry. The apprehension that import liberalisation might lead to the 
demise of domestic industries in the developing countries (the fear of de-
industrialisation) becomes untenable if we indeed find that the intensity of IIT 
increases with the reduction of trade barriers. The widely held „smooth 
adjustment hypothesis‟ states that a high share IIT wi ll be associated with 
relatively low adjustment costs, since, with intra-industry adjustment, workers 
move within industries rather than between them. 
There is the distinction between the two types of IIT – 
horizontal and vertical IIT. 
Horizontal IIT refers to the simultaneous export and import of differentiated 
products within an industry of a similar quality. Vertical IIT, on the other hand, 
refers to the exchange of differentiated products that are of different qualities. 
Horizontal IIT arises when countries with similar factor endowment ratios 
specialize in unique varieties to exploit internal scale economies. Vertical IIT, on 
the other hand, arises when countries with different factor endowment ratios 
specialize in varieties that are differentiated by quality: capital-abundant 


--- Page 6 ---
 
 
 
58 
Modern Theories of  
International Trade countries would specialize in the production of higher quality varieties while 
labor-abundant countries would specialize in low quality varieties.  Vertical IIT 
between two countries will arise given an overlap in the demand for different 
qualities. This possibility is enhanced by the greater factor endowment difference 
between the countries.  In practice, the trade that emerges from specialization at 
different stages of producing a particular good may also be treated as vertical II T 
(for example, China imports parts of a product and exports the finished product).  
The extent of adjustment costs associated with trade liberalization can differ 
depending on whether IIT is horizontal or vertical. It is generally held that while 
any type of IIT entails relatively lower adjustment costs than inter-industry trade, 
the adjustment cost will be the least when IIT is horizontal in nature.
  
Check Your Progress 1 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Describe Intra-Industry trade. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2)  Differentiate between horizontal and vertical IIT? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Discuss the impact of trade liberalization on growth of IIT in a country. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3.3 THEORY OF INTRA-INDUSTRY TRADE 
3.3.1 Need for a Separate Theory for Intra-Industry trade 
The early empirical studies on IIT stimulated analyses that were directed at 
establishing the extent of the phenomenon in different countries at different 
points in time. Grubel and Lloyd (1975) are noteworthy among these works, 
which documents detailed evidence of IIT for all major industrialised countries. 
While Grubel and Lloyd (1975) suggested a number of plausible explanations for 
IIT, it remained `a phenomenon in search of a theory' till the late 1970s.   


--- Page 7 ---
 
 
 
59 
Intra-Industry 
Trade „What determines the pattern of international trade?‟ This question has been a 
subject of considerable interest to economists ever since the formulation of 
comparative advantage theory by David Ricardo. The well-known Heckscher-
Ohlin-Samuelson (H-O-S) model, the synthesis of the initial attempts, remained 
the main theory for quite a long time. This model provides explanation for the 
emergence of inter-industry trade based on factor endowment difference of 
countries. This theory's core is the proposition that trade flows between countries 
are in `complementary' goods with differing factor intensities. Accordingly, the 
bulk of empirical testing since then has been on exploring such complementarity.   
Ever since Leontief‟s results cast doubt upon the H -O-S explanations (the well-
known Leontief paradox), there has been considerable work on refining the tests 
and restating the models to make them more suitable for testing. The scepticism 
on the explanatory power of the H-O-S model originated from the Leontief 
paradox apart, the new attempts have been stimulated by yet another observation. 
That is, a predominant amount of international trade takes place among industrial 
nations, with relatively similar resource endowments, which is difficult to 
reconcile with the prediction of the H-O-S model. It was generally held that the 
traditional trade models, based on the assumption of perfect competition cannot 
provide a proper understanding of IIT, particularly among the industrial 
countries. 
Clearly, what appeared to be imperative was a general equilibrium theory of 
international trade, which incorporates the elements of economies of scale, 
product differentiation and imperfect competition. The pursuit of the task, 
however, was less easy than the stating of it. A major difficulty was that scale 
economies internal to firms are incompatible with perfect competition that was 
assumed in all traditional models. In short, theorists in the field lacked analytic 
tools necessary to formalise and refine the ideas in tractable mathematical 
models.  
However, some major developments in economic theory in the 1970s completely 
changed the scenario. First, there was substantial progress in the theoretical 
modelling of imperfect competition, which led to the revival of Chamberlin's 
"large group" analysis of competition between similar firms producing 
differentiated products. Secondly, the later half of 1970s witnessed rigorous 
theoretical analysis of the process of product differentiation, by Spence (1976) 
and Dixit and Stiglitz (1977). This approach, called the "love-of variety 
approach" considers that each consumer has a taste for many different varieties. 
Later, Lancaster (1979) advanced an alternative approach, known as the "ideal 
variety approach", which considers that each consumer has a desire for the most 
preferred variety rather than many varieties. Though there is a significant 
difference in the two approaches, both represent cases of what is called 
"horizontal differentiation". 


--- Page 8 ---
 
 
 
60 
Modern Theories of  
International Trade These developments provided economists with appropriate toolkit to facilitate the 
incorporation of product differentiation, economies of scale and imperfect 
competition into the formal trade theory and proliferation of theoretical research 
on IIT. The new approach proved useful for providing theoretically convincing 
explanations for IIT and integrating them with the conventional explanations for 
inter-industry trade based on factor proportions. It may, however, be noted that as 
long as a general theory of imperfect competition does not exist, it is not possible 
to arrive at a general theory of trade with imperfect competition. There are too 
many ways in which imperfect market structure can be modelled and in principle 
there can be as many models of specialisation and trade. 
The theoretical literature may be grouped as belonging to four different strands. 
The earlier attempts represent models of horizontal IIT –
 that is, the exchange of 
commodities differentiated by those attributes excluding quality. Horizontal IIT 
is explained by economies of scale in the presence of product differentiation and 
imperfect competition. Such models have greater relevance for understanding the 
occurrence of IIT among developed countries. Significant attempts were made in 
the later years to offer a different strand of analysis, which represent cases of 
vertical IIT –
 that is, the exchange of commodities differentiated by quality. In 
general, these models explain the pattern of IIT along the lines similar to the 
pattern of inter-industry trade predicted in the conventional trade model, 
according the central role to factor endowment differences. Such models are 
considered to be particularly relevant to explain the presence of IIT between 
unequal trade partners. A third strand of analysis attempted to explain IIT in 
differentiated intermediate products in the presence of international returns to 
scale. Finally, some theoretical attempts have aimed at providing explanations for 
IIT in identical commodities on the basis of strategic interactions of 
internationally oligopolistic firms. In what follows, we shall sum up the essential 
elements of the major strands of theories. 
Check
 Your Progress 2 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  What led to need for a Separate Theory for Intra-Industry trade? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Describe „love of variety approach‟ in intra industry trade. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 


--- Page 9 ---
 
 
 
61 
Intra-Industry 
Trade 3) Describe „ideal variety approach‟ in intra industry trade. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3.3.2. IIT in Horizontally Differentiated Commodities. 
Theoretical models of IIT in horizontally differentiated commodities are 
generally based on the Chamberlinian notion of monopolistic competition. As 
regards the treatment of product differentiation, the love-of-variety approach and 
the ideal variety approach are used by various economists. Notwithstanding 
differences in the approach followed to specify the demand side, all these models 
yielded broadly similar results. The essential arguments of these models may be 
summed up as follows. 
In Krugman's model, the love of variety approach is assumed on the demand 
side. Each consumer has the same utility function, wherein all varieties enter 
symmetrically. The utility function for each of the (identical) consumer is:  
                                                                                        (1) 
Where ci is the consumption of each variety i = 1,….N.  Given the assumption of 
diminishing marginal utility from each variety
  0' 'v
, aggregate utility (U) can 
be maximised by increasing the number of varieties (N) consumed rather than by 
spending the income on few varieties.  
The economy under consideration is assumed to have only one factor of 
production - that is, labour. The underlying market structure is assumed to be the 
Chamberlinian monopolisitc competition. A large number of firms exist, each of 
which produces a different variety (y i) of the same good Y, but with the same 
cost function: 
                                                        (2) 
 stands for fixed labor input while  is marginal labor input. The term  
incorporates economies of scale into the model. In this model, each firm 
produces a unique variety as no two firms have incentive to produce the same 
variety. This is due to the fact that economies of scale operate at the level of 
varieties and, at the sa me time, all available varieties enter the consumer‟s utility 
function.   
The marginal cost, MCi for the firm is         while the average cost is given as: 
                                                                 (3) 
This means that AC falls with the increase in output (yi) while the MC is constant 
(see Figure 3.1). 
iiLy 
()ii
i
i i i
wL w y wAC wy y y
     
w
' ''
1
( ),        0,      0
N
i
i
U v c v v

  
' 
 '' 


--- Page 10 ---
 
 
 
62 
Modern Theories of  
International Trade  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 
3.1: Average Cost Curve and Marginal Cost curve 
The symmetry assumption in regard to both cost and demand functions will 
ensure that all varieties actually produced will be produced in the same quantity 
and at the same price. Thus, to arrive at equilibrium, one needs to determine only 
the price and output of a single representative variety (therefore, we can ignore 
the subscript  i ).  The two equilibrium conditions for firms under monopolistic 
competition are: (i) MR=MC and (ii) p = AC (zero profit in the long run), where 
MR is marginal revenue and p
 is price. When η is the elasticity of demand for 
variety i. MR equals 





  
111
p  
Using MR=MC condition, we can show that: 






 1
w
p
                            (4) 
Similarly, using the p = AC condition, it can be shown that 
 

 Lcw
p
                          (5) 
Where η is the elasticity of demand for variety i. We assume that                   - 
that is, elasticity of demand decreases with increase in consumption of a variety 
(note that this assumption always hold for any linear demand curve, q = a - bp). 
With this assumption, it is clear that the graph of equation 4 (AB curve) slopes 
upward with the increase in c (see Figure 3.
2). This is because increase in c leads 
to a decline in η, and therefore the term  
1   in equation (4) increases as β is 
a constant. Turning to equation 5, the graph of this equation (PQ curve) slopes 
downward with the increase in c (this is firm‟s average cost curve).  
 
 
0iid dc 
AC 
MC 
pi 
yi 
wβ 
