--- Page 30 ---
 
 
 
82 
Modern Theories of  
International Trade 2) Discuss the concept of product life cycle model. What are the various stages 
in product life cycle? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Discuss the concept of economies of scale? How can economies of scale 
define current pattern of international trade in recent years? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
4.4 PRODUCT DIFFERENTIATION AND 
INTERNATIONAL TRADE 
Currently, most of the international trade is based on differentiated product rather 
than homogeneous product in world market. For example, Audi is not identical to 
a Hyundai, Land Rover, Honda or a BMW. Therefore, most of the international 
trade occurred within differentiated products of the same industry or broad 
product group in same HS code
2 known as intra industry trade as opposed to 
inter-industry trade in completely different products. We have already discussed 
about Intra-industry trade in details in Unit 3. Let us discuss briefly here as a part 
of alternative explanations of trade theories. Intra- industry trade models are 
developed by various trade economists like Helpman, Krugman, Lancaster and 
others since 1979. Intra-industry trade or trade of similar products remains 
unexplained in the classical and Heckscher-Ohlin international trade models and 
theories. Comparative advantage theory earlier only explained the pattern of 
inter-industry trade. Intra- industry trade between countries occurred due to 
economies of scale in production. Competition within market forces each firm, 
plant or industry to focus on only few or one variety and styles of the same 
product rather than several diversified varieties and styles. This strategy is 
adopted by many firms to keep unit cost low as specialization decreases per unit 
cost of production. Thus, country can import the other varieties and styles from 
another country. Intra- industry trade lead to overall welfare of consumer as 
consumer received wider range of products at lower prices due to economies of 
scale in production. This can be explained with the example of European Union 
(EU).
 Before formation of EU, plant size of United States (US) firms and 
European firms was similar, but the unit cost were much higher in Europe due to 
many more varieties and styles of a product compared
 to US firm. When EU 
                                                 
2The Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System, also known as the Harmonized System (HS) 
of tariff nomenclature is an internationally standardized system of names and numbers to classify traded 
products. It came into effect in 1988 and has since been developed and maintained by the World Customs 
Organization (WCO) (formerly the Customs  Co-operation Council), an independent intergovernmental 
organization based in Brussels, Belgium, with over 200 member countries 


--- Page 31 ---
 
 
 
83 
Alternative 
Explanations of 
Trade  
formed and tariffs were reduced each plant specialized in the production of only 
few goods which sharply declined per unit cost in European Union. 
The main reason for inter-industry trade is when we aggregate trade data at 2 
digit level or HS-2 level; many products are aggregated into one category. For 
example, India imports and exports similar products like petroleum products, 
automobiles and so on. Petroleum products like crude oil, petrol, and diesel are 
aggregated into one category of product code under HS-2 code but actually India 
imports crude oil from Middle East countries which is processed in coastal areas 
of India and exported back to another country. Similarly, India imports 
components of automobiles from Japan as Japan has a comparative advantage in 
manufacturing of auto-components. These auto-components are assembled in 
India and exported back to another country. Most of the assembly lines and crude 
oil refineries are in India as labour is cheaper in India or India is labour-intensive 
country. 
However, since all these types are generally aggregated into one export or import 
category, it could appear that the countries are exporting and importing 
“identical” products when they are actually exporting one type of automobile o r 
petroleum products and importing another type. When there are no differences in 
resource endowments or technologies between countries‟ economies of scale , 
discriminated products can explain intra-industry trade through is known as 
monopolistic competition model. Monopolistic competition model emphasi se on 
consumer demand for a multiplicity of characteristics embodied in the goods sold 
in a same HS code category. In this model, trade is possible even when countries 
are very comparable in their productive capabilities. 
The level of intra-industry trade can be measured by the intra- industry trade 
index by following formula: 
           
    
Where T represent intra-industry trade index, X represent value of exports and M 
represents value of imports of a particular industry or commodity group and the 
vertical bars in the numerator of equation denote the absolute value. Intra 
industry trade index (T) value ranges from 0 to 1.  T = 0 represent that a country 
only exports or imports the good or there is no intra industry trade and T=1 
represent that intra- industry trade is maximum or exports and imports of a goods 
are equal. T index is calculated by various empirical research studies and found 
that current most of the trade is guided by intra- industry trade. In 1967, Grubel 
and Lloyd calculated T index for 10 industrial countries and found that combined 
weighted average of T for all industries in all 10 countries was 0.48. This result 
indicates that in 1967 nearly half of the trade among 10 industrial countries 
involved the exchange of differentiated products of the same industry. 


--- Page 32 ---
 
 
 
84 
Modern Theories of  
International Trade 4.5 GRAVITY MODEL OF TRA DE 
The Gravity Model of Trade is a key and robust empirical model in the 
international trade used to understand the pattern of international trade. This 
model was firstly introduced and used by Jan Tinbergen in 1962 employing 
gravity equation which is derived from Newton‟s theory of gravitation. As globes 
are attracted to each other in terms of their sizes and proximity similarly 
countries are also attracted by their sizes and proximities. According to gravity 
model, bilateral trade between two countries is proportional to size, measured by 
GDP, and
 inversely proportional to the geographic distance between them. The 
main focus of this model is to forecasts on the bilateral trade flows and these 
forecasts are based on the distance within two countries as well as their 
respective economic dimensions. 
It is important to note that, the gravity model was not based on any theory but 
most of the trade economists empirically derived the impact of size and distance 
of the country on bilateral trade flows. As most of the trade economists used 
gravity model to explain pattern of trade therefore this model has been seen as a 
significant development on previous trade theories of Ricardo and Heckscher-
Ohlin. Before introduction of gravity model none of the theoretical trade model 
used 
the size of an economy significantly in their explanation. 
This model is important in terms of forecasting the impact of changes in 
trade policy on trade costs. This model is also flexible in terms of distance where 
it can cover different variables like tariff imposed at a border, cultural, 
institutional and political differences between trading nations. The Gravity model 
has recently used for understand the impact of BREXIT on trade flows between 
UK, EU and other countries. 
Moreover, the gravity model is no longer concerned only with trade in goods, but 
has recently been applied with success to trade in services. 
Intuitive gravity model:  
Firstly gravity model was introduced as an intuitive way of understanding trade 
flows between countries. In its basic form, the gravity model can be written as 
follows:  
      = c + b1 log GDPi+b2log GDPj+b3     ij +eij…………………..(1a) 
    ij = log (distanceij)-----------------------------------------------(1b) 
In this model X ij represent exports from country i to country j, GDP represent 
each country‟s gross domestic product,   ij indicates trade costs between the two 
countries, distance represent the geographical distance between two counties, as 
an observable proxy for trade costs  and eij is a random error term. The c term is a 
regression constant, and the b terms are coefficients to be estimated.  


--- Page 33 ---
 
 
 
85 
Alternative 
Explanations of 
Trade  
The term “gravity” originates from the fact that the nonlinear form of equation 1a 
look like Newton‟s law of gravity: bilateral trade between two countries is 
proportional to size, measured by GDP, and  inversely proportional to the 
geographic distance between them. Putting into another words, gravity model 
explain that we expect similar countries trade more, but we assume countries 
wither larger distance trade less, possibly because transport costs between them 
are higher. 
However, the intuitive gravity model has some limitation. For example, If India 
enters into a Free Trade Agreement with EU that lowers tariffs on their respective 
goods. Basic trade theory indicates that it will be also affect the trade with USA 
even though it is not party to the agreement. One of the important concepts of 
trade creation and trade diversion are examples of such effects. But intuitive 
gravity model does not account the impact of preferential trade agreement or free 
trade agreement on third country. This is clear from equation 1a which indicates 
that, 
       
       
   
Therefore, decreasing trade costs on one bilateral route does not affect trade on 
other routes in the basic model, which contradicts standard trade theory. 
A second problem with intuitive gravity model rises if we consider equal 
reductions in trade costs across all routes, including internal trade. For example 
there is decline in the price of crude oil, which drops transport costs everywhere, 
including inside countries. In the intuitive gravity model, this change would 
result in proportionate increases in trade across all bilateral routes, including 
internal trade. However, such an outcome is not considered in this model despite 
the change in trade costs as relative prices have not changed at all. In the absence 
of a change in relative prices, economic theory assumes that consumption 
patterns to remain constant for a given amount of total production measured by 
Gross Domestic Product.  
As discussed in the previous sections there are problem with intuitive model of 
gravity hence this model was alerted by some trade economist. The first attempt 
in this regard was made by Anderson in 1979. However, the applied literature 
considered theoretical gravity model after the famous “gravity with gravitas” 
model of Anderson and Van Wincoop in 2003. This model is essentially a 
demand function which assumes that utility of consumers increases from 
consuming more variety of goods. From the production side, this model assumes 
that firm produces a single, unique product variety under increasing return to 
scale. 
 
 


--- Page 34 ---
 
 
 
86 
Modern Theories of  
International Trade Check Your Progress 2 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Critically discuss the concept of Intra-Industry Trade. How international trade 
is based on product differentiation? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) What is the Gravity model of trade? Explain with the help of formula and 
examples. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
4.6 KRUGMAN ALTERNATIVE THEORY OF 
TRADE 
Krugman explained his theory of international trade by considering internal 
returns to scale and adopting a recent model of innovation under monopolistic 
competition. Internal economies of scale suggest that per unit average output cost 
will decrease as the total output increases. Most of the products have high fixed 
costs, and as production increases, it spreads the fixed cost of product. According 
to Krugman, if there are internal economies of scale, markets has fewer firms and 
each firm will produce more and discriminate their product from their 
competitors. Total number of firm is determined by average cost and price. When 
the price is higher than average, new firms will enter the market. Krugman also 
explained that larger economies have higher demand, hence these economies has 
higher internal return to scale. 
Internal returns to scale is also applicable to International trade when there is 
more trade between countries. Suppose if trade between India and EU suddenly 
emerged due to free trade agreement then production in both markets will grow. 
There will be fewer total firms, and each persisting firm would produce more. 
Consumers in both countries would be able to buy variety of the products with 
low price. Per unit cost would also fall, because of the exploitation of further 
internal economies of scale. Therefore, even if there is no absolute or 
comparative advantage in trade, both countries will undertake trade to exploit the 
benefits of internal economies of scale. Countries will, all else same export the 
goods where market size or aggregate demand is highest or start their production 
process in a country where market size is higher by undertaking foreign direct 
investment. The main reason for this is that firms will be able to exploit higher 
internal economies of scale than other countries in that market. Therefore, 


--- Page 35 ---
 
 
 
87 
Alternative 
Explanations of 
Trade  
according to Krugman countries will tend to export the product in which they 
have specialization or they are able to produce more under the concept of internal 
economies of scale. 
When tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade are more, factors of production will 
tend to move to countries where there are economies of scale in production. For 
example, suppose labour is only one factor of production, trade barriers would 
induce labour to move to the country with largest market as real wages will be 
more and there will be extra product diversity in that market. Krugman also 
explained his idea considering trade cost in the form of transaction costs. Under 
transaction costs specialization will be more limited, as trade costs decline the 
profitability or exporting. Severities of Internal economies of scale also decide 
the degree of specialization. Country will be specializing more when internal 
economies of scale will be more for products. Therefore, higher trade cost and 
limits of internal economies of scale lead to intra-industry trade. 
According to Krugman trade between countries is also dependent on difference in 
factor endowments. Nation will export the good which are relatively abundant. 
But if two countries are equally abundant, it will lead to intra-industry trade 
between countries. If the countries are equally abundant,
 the effects for changes 
in the distribution of income as a result of trade then trade will be Pareto optimal. 
The gains from the trade and income distribution depend on the severity of 
difference between factor endowments. In case of more unique country‟s factor 
endowment, the more relatively scarce factor will lose from trade and the 
relatively abundant factor will gain. The international market scare factor will 
lose from the trade because of the lower price of that product in that country as it 
faces competition from foreign producers who have lower costs because of 
relative abundance. Whether trade is Pareto optimal is determined by whether the 
benefit increase from product difference is great enough to make up for the 
comparative loss of income for the scarce 
factor. 
Comparative advantage theory fail to explain trade based on internal economies 
of scale therefore Krugman explained the idea of internal economies of scale and 
monopolistic competition. If there are no product differences in relative costs, 
technology and tastes,
 gains from trade can be generated from lower prices and 
greater product diversity. This is an alternative approach to the division of labour 
and trade theory. 
4.7 COST OF LOGISTICS, ENVIRONMENTAL 
STANDARDS, AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE 
Classical trade theories assumed that there is no transportation cost or 
transportation cost is zero, but in actual case significant cost is needed for 
transporting good from one place to another place in international trade. Cost of 
transportation or logistics cost includes freight charges, warehousing costs, costs 
of loading and unloading, insurance premiums, and interest charges while goods 


--- Page 36 ---
 
 
 
88 
Modern Theories of  
International Trade are in transit. Trade between two countries will occur only if the pre-trade price 
difference in the two countries exceeds the cost of transporting the good from one 
country to another country. Most of the commodities are not traded 
internationally due to high logistics costs. For example, Cement is not transacted 
internationally due to high transportation cost because of its high weight to value 
ratio. Cement is only traded to border areas due to high transportation cost.  
Generally price of non-traded goods and services are determined by domestic 
demand and supply, while price of traded goods and services are determined by 
demand and supply in the world market. Currently, logistics cost between 
countries are significantly declined which resulted in increase in international 
trade. For example, Fish, Meat, fruits and vegetable found in many European 
countries in winters are shipped from country like India. In the past, due to high 
transportation cost and unavailability of refrigerator containers many perishable 
goods used to spoil in the transportation phase. Logistics costs are much higher in 
developing countries rather than developed countries and denote a significant 
obstacle to international trade for industries in developing countries. 
Transportation cost can be analysed by two methods. One is by general 
equilibrium model and another by partial equilibrium analysis. Partial 
equilibrium analysis assumes constant exchange rate and constant level of 
income in two countries.  
Logistics cost also influence the location of production under the international 
trade. Industries can be classified as market seeking, resource seeking or 
footloose industries. Resource seeking industries are establishing their production 
near to the source of raw material used by the industry. The main reason for this 
as the transporting raw material used by the industry is substantially higher than 
for shipping the finished product to market. For example basic chemicals, 
aluminium and steel which processes heavy and bulky raw material into lighter 
finished products. On the other hand, market seeking industries established there 
plant near to the markets. Market seeking industries normally produce goods that 
become bulky to transport during the production process. For example, cold-
drink industries like Coca-Cola, Pepsi established there manufacturing plant near 
to market as bottling weight is higher than their raw material like concentrated 
syrup. Finally footloose industries are producing the goods that face neither 
substantial weight gain or lose during the production process. These industries 
tend to established near to availability of cheaper input cost. An example is 
provided by Japanese automobile industries which ship automobile machinery to 
India to be assembled due to cheap labour availability in India. Currently most of 
the countries are giving preferential tax treatment to attract these footloose 
industries.  
International trade is also affected by environmental standards in different 
countries. Environmental standards refer to levels of air pollution, water 
pollution, thermal pollution and pollution resulting from garbage disposal that a 


--- Page 37 ---
 
 
 
89 
Alternative 
Explanations of 
Trade  
nation allows. International trade which creates negative impact on environment 
can lead to serious trade problems because the price of traded goods and services 
often does not reflect the negative externalities or socio environmental costs. 
Countries with lower environmental standards are able to attract more polluting 
industries. For example, United States labour opposed NAFTA due to fear that it 
would lead to job losses as industries might move to Mexico to take benefit of 
more relax or less environmental laws compare to U.S market. According to 
world bank study in 1992, exports of polluting industries expanded faster than 
clean industries in the last two decades in the world market and mostly shifted to 
underdeveloped and developing countries from developed nation (Lo
w, 1992).  
As country make progress,  people demand more clean industries rather than 
polluting industries. Most of the developed countries are now taking help of 
environmental standards to protect their economy from polluting industries which 
also increased non-tariff barriers amongst the countries. 
Check Your Progress 3 
Note: 
i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Discuss the Krugman‟s alternative theory of international trade. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) Discuss the impact of environmental standards and logistics cost on location 
of the production and international trade. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) What is meant by resource - seeking industries? Market seeking industries? 
Footloose industries? What determine the classification of the industry? How 
does this affect the pattern of international trade? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
4.8  LET US SUM UP 
In this unit, we discussed about alternative explanation of international trade 
theories. Classical theories of International Trade unexplained significant portion 
of real International trade flows between countries. The current unit fill this gap 
by providing alternative explanation of international trade which is based on 
empirical evidences of current trade flow with more relaxed and realistic 
assumptions to explain current patterns of international trade. Alternative 
explanation of trade theories are based on concept of increasing return to scale, 
economies of scale, product life cycle theory, Gravity Model, Product 
