--- Page 21 ---
 
 
 
73 
Intra-Industry 
Trade Hwang, H. (1984) „Intra-Industry Trade and Oligopoly: A Conjectural Variations 
Approach‟, Canadian Journal of Economics, 17, 126-37. 
Kemp, M., and Negishi, T. (1970) „Variable Return to Scale, Commodity Taxes, 
Factor Market Distortions, and Their Implications for Trade Gains‟, Swedish 
Journal of Economics, 72, 1-11.
 
Krugman, P. R. (1979) „Increasing Returns, Monopolistic Competition and 
International Trade‟, Journal of International Economics, 9, 469-79. 
Krugman, P. R. (1980) „Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the 
Pattern of Trade‟, American Economic Review, 70, 950-59. 
Lancaster, K. (1979) Variety, Equity and Efficiency (Oxford: Basil Blackwell). 
Lancaster, K. (1980) „Intra -Industry Trade under Perfect Monopolistic 
Competition‟, Journal of International Economics, 10, 151-75. 
Leontief, W.W. (1954) „Domestic Production and Foreign Trade: The American 
Capital Position Re-examined‟, Economia Internazionale, 7, 9-45. 
Lipsey, R. (1976) „Review of Grubel and Lloyd (1975)‟, Journal of International 
Economics, 6, 312-14. 
MacDougall, G.D.A (1951) „British and American Exports: A Study Suggested 
by the Theory of Comparative Costs‟, Economic Journal, 61, 697
-724. 
Matthews, R.C.O. (1949) „Reciprocal Demand and Increasing Returns‟, Review 
of Economic Studies, 17, 149-58. 
Melvin, J. (1969) „Increasing Returns to Scale as a Determinant of Trade‟, 
Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science, 2 , 389-402. 
Panagariya, A (1981) „Variable Returns to Scale in Production and Patterns of 
Specialisation‟, American Economic Review, 71, 221-30. 
Pomfret, R. (1979) „Intra -Industry Trade in Intra-Regional and International 
Trade‟, in Giersch, H. (ed.) (1979) On the Economics of Intra-Industry Trade 
(Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr.). 
Shaked, A and Sutton, J. (1984) „Natural Oligopolies and International Trade‟, in 
Kierzkowski, H (ed.). Monopolistic Competition and International Trade 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
Spence, M. (1976) „Product Differentiation and Welfare‟, American Economic 
Review 66, 407-14. 
Stiglitz, J, E (1987), „The Causes and Consequences of the Dependence of 
Quality on Price‟ Journal of Economic Literature, 25, 1-48. 


--- Page 22 ---
 
 
 
74 
Modern Theories of  
International Trade Tharakan, P.K.M. (ed.) (1983) Intra-Industry Trade: Empirical and 
Methodological Aspects (Amsterdam: North Holland).  
Veeramani, C (2002) “Intra -Industry Trade of India: Trends and Country-
Specific Factors”, Review of World Economics/ Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 
(Springer-Verlag), Vol.138, No. 3, 509-533. 
Veeramani (2009a) “Trade Barriers, Multinational Involvement and Intra -
Industry Trade: Panel Data Evidence from India”, Applied Economics,  41, 20: 
2541-2553. 
Veeramani (2009b) “Specialization Patterns und er Trade Liberalization: 
Evidence from India and China”, in Natalia Dinello and Wang Shaoguang (ed.) 
China, India and Beyond: Development Drivers and Limitations, Edward Elgar, 
Cheltenham, 2009. 
Venables, A. J. (1990) „International Capacity Choice and Nat ional Market 
Games‟, Journal of International Economics, 29, 23-42.
 
Verdoorn, P.J. (1960) „The Intra -block Trade of Benelux‟, in Robinson, E.A.G 
(ed.) Economic Consequences of the Size of Nations (London: Macmillan).  
Zvi, S. B. and Helpman, E. (1992) „Oligopoly in Segmented Markets‟, in 
Grossman, G. M. (ed.), Imperfect Competition and International Trade  
(Cambridge: MIT Press).  
Bergstrand, J. H. (1983) „Measurement and Determinants of Intra -Industry 
International Trade‟, in Tharakan, P.K.M. (ed.) Intra-Industry Trade: Empirical 
and Methodological Aspects (Amsterdam: North Holland).  
Vona, S. (1991) „On the Measurement of Intra-Industry Trade: Some Further 
Thoughts‟, Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 127, 678-700. 
Hamilton, C. and Kniest, P. (1991) „Trade Libera lisation, Structural Adjustment 
and Intra-Industry Trade: A Note‟, Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 127, 356-67. 
Brülhart, M. (1994) „Marginal Intra -Industry Trade: Measurement and the 
Relevance for the Pattern of Industrial Adjustment‟, Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 
130, 600-13. 
Kol, J. and Mennes, L. B. M. (1989) „Corrections for Trade Imbalance: A 
Survey‟, Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 125, 703-17. 
Zhang, J., Witteloostuijn, A and Zhou, C (2005) „Chinese Bilateral Intra -Industry 
Trade: A Panel Data Study for 50 Countries in the 1992- 2001 Period‟ Review of 
World Economics, 141, 510-540. 


--- Page 23 ---
 
 
 
75 
Intra-Industry 
Trade 3.7  ANSWERS/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES  
Check Your Progress 1 
1)     Refer to Section 3.2 
2)   Horizontal IIT refers  to the simultaneous export and  import  of the 
differentiated products within an industry which are of a similar quality. 
Vertical IIT, on the other hand,  refers to the exchange of differentiated 
products that are of different qualities. 
3)  Refer to Section 3.2 
Check Your Progress 2 
1)   Refer to Sections 3.3.1 
2)   "Love-of variety approach" considers that each consumer has a taste for 
many different varieties. 
3)   "Ideal variety approach", which  considers that  each consumer has a desire 
for the most preferred variety rather than many varieties. 
Check Your Progress 3 
1)   Refer to Section 3.3.2 and Fig. 3.1 
2)   In the „integrated economy‟, each variety will be produced  by only one firm 
and therefore in only one country. All varieties will, however, be consumed 
in both countries, giving rise to IIT. 
Check Your Progress 4 
1)  
 Refer to Section 3.3.4 
2)  Refer to Section 3.3.5 
3)   Refer to Section 3.3.3 
Check Your Progress 5 
1)  
 The Grubel Lloyd (GL) index is used to measure the intensity of IIT. 
2)   Refer to Section 3.4.1 


--- Page 24 ---
 
 
 
76 
Modern Theories of  
International Trade 
UNIT 4  AL TERNATIVE EXPLANATIONS OF 
TRADE  
Structure 
4.0  Objective 
4.1  Introduction 
4.2  Technological Gap Model and Product Life Cycle Theory 
4.3  Economies of Scale and International trade 
4.4  Product differentiation and International Trade 
4.5  Gravity Model of trade 
4.6  Krugman Alternative Theory of Trade 
4.7  Cost of Logistics, Environmental Standards, and International Trade 
4.8  Lets us sum up 
4.9  Key words 
4.1
0  Some useful books  
4.11  Answers/ Hints to check your progress Exercises 
4.0  OBJECTIVES 
After studying this Unit, you should be able to:  
 explain new, complementary trade theories based on real world situations 
using concept of Economies of Scale, Imperfect Competition, Product 
differentiation, Technological Gap etc.; 
 examine the effect of relaxing each of the classical and Heckscher-Ohlin 
trade theory assumptions; and  
 critically examine the basics for real world international trade patterns in 
world market. 
4.1   INTRODUCTION 
The main objective of this unit is to discuss new and complementary trade 
theories to convey the current patterns of international trade that are closer to 
reality with less restrictive assumptions. Absolute Advantage, Comparative 
Advantage and Heckscher & Ohlin theories left unexplained a substantial share 
of today‟s international trade. Many theories have been developed after World 
                                                 
 Contributed by  Dr. Pravin Jadhav, Assistant Professor,  
Institute of Infrastructure Technology Research and Management (IITRAM)  


--- Page 25 ---
 
 
 
77 
Alternative 
Explanations of 
Trade  
War II to explain Trade and international production. These theories find out a 
number of factors that could explain International Trade flows between different 
countries, linking the aspect like cost reduction and economies of scale. Thus, 
this current unit explains complementary theories of international trade on the 
basis of economies of scale, imperfect competition and differences in 
technological changes between countries.  
Classical trade theories explained the pattern of international trade using absolute 
advan
tage, comparative advantage and on differences in factor endowments 
between countries. However, these theories could not explain significant pattern 
of today‟s international trade.  Relaxing the assumption of perfect competition, 
constant economies of scale, and no differences in technological changes 
between countries however required new empirical theories to provide substantial 
evidence of current pattern of international trade, which was not explained by 
classical trade theories.  
The assumption of Heckscher-Ohlin theory is not generally valid as these 
theories assume both nations use the same technology in production. In the 
reality, most of the countries are using different technologies for the production. 
Technological gap model and product life cycle models explain these 
phenomena. Both of these models are viewed as dynamic extensions of the basic 
Heckscher-Ohlin model. These models are discussed in section 4.2.
 
Classical trade theories assumed constant return to scale, but international trade 
could be also based on increasing return to scale. According to current trade 
pattern in international trade, though two countries are similar in every aspect 
there is still a basis for mutually beneficial trade because of economies of scale. 
According to concept of economies of scale, when each country specializes in the 
production of one product, then the world total output is greater than without 
specialization. This was unexplained in earlier classical trade theories; (see  
Unit 1) hence section 4.3 will explain the concept of increasing return to scale 
and economies of scale to validate recent trade flows between countries.  
Another significant development in recent years in international trade flows are a 
large portion of international trade today involves of exchange of differentiated 
products which the intra-industry trade model in current chapter under section 4.4 
explains. Comparative advantage theory fails to explain the intra-industry trade 
that arise to take advantage of important economies of scale in the production in 
different countries.  
Recently most of trade flows between countries are also affected by distance 
between two destinations. Gravity Model explains this concept in this chapter 
under section 4.5. The main focus of this model is to forecast 
bilateral trade flows 
between countries based on the distance within two countries and their respective 
economic dimensions. Gravity model is now used more frequently to empirically 
analyse trade patterns by using distance between two countries, taking the help of 
physical distance, cultural distance, etc. 


--- Page 26 ---
 
 
 
78 
Modern Theories of  
International Trade Another important current phenomenon can be viewed from the angle of 
transportation and logistics costs in the international trade. Logistics cost reduce 
the volume and benefits of international trade. A classical theory does not 
consider transportation or logistics cost in the explanation of international trade. 
An environmental standard also affects the location of industry and international 
trade which is explained in this chapter at the end in section 
4.7.  
Krugman also significantly explained his alternative international trade theory by 
considering internal returns to scale and adopting a recent innovation model 
under monopolistic competition. Krugman‟s alternative theory of international 
trade based on more realistic assumption is explained in this chapter under 
section 4.6. 
Relaxing the assumption of classical trade theories only modifies the concepts 
but does not invalidate the classical trade theories. These theories are only the 
extension of classical trade theories with more realistic assumptions which 
explain the current patterns of international trade in the world market.  
4.2  TECHNOLOGICAL GAP MODEL AND 
PRODUCT LIFE CYCLE THEORY 
According to the technological gap model introduced by Posner in 1961, most of 
the trade in industrialized countries is based on introducing new products and 
new production processes. Introduction of new product and process creates 
temporary monopoly for innovative firm and nation in the world market by 
protecting their products by patents and copyrights. The main objective of this 
protection is to encourage flow of inventions in the market. 
According to technological gap model, technologically advanced countries export 
technology intensive goods. However, by technological know
-how, foreigners or 
underdeveloped and emerging markets also adopt the foreign technology and 
again export their product to high technological countries with some value 
addition. This kind of trade occurs as labour cost is lower in the underdeveloped 
or in emerging markets which creates competitive advantage to emerging 
markets. But this model fails to explain the reasons, size of technological gaps 
and how technological gap is eliminated over time. 
Product life cycle model explains a simplification and addition of technological 
gap model. The main objective o
f Product life of cycle theory is the improvement 
of trade theory beyond David Ricardo‟s static framework of comparative 
advantages. Raymond Vernon explained this theory in 1966, where he discussed 
three stages of production for various manufactured goods. Vernon focused on 
the dynamics of comparative advantage and depicted inspiration from the product 
life cycle to explicate how trade patterns change over time. This theory tries to 
explain an internationalisation process of a firm where a local manufacturer in a 
developed country begins selling a new, technologically advanced product to 
foreign markets. As demand from international markets rises, production 


--- Page 27 ---
 
 
 
79 
Alternative 
Explanations of 
Trade  
gradually shifts overseas enabling the firm to maximise economies of scale and 
to avoid trade barriers, generally known as tariff jumping hypothesis 1. In the later 
stage when product matures and becomes more of a commodity, the number of 
competitors increases, hence production shift to lower cost countries or labour-
intensive countries.  
He argued that comparative advantage for many products may shift over time 
from one country to another because these products go through a product life 
cycle. The main assumption of this theory is that most manufactured products 
follow a life cycle in which these products first appear as innovations and 
eventually become completely standardized. First stage of the production is 
called „innovation‟ where the new product is introduced in to the market. In this 
stage, manufacturers mainly concentrate on the degree of freedom of their 
product and mainly invest in the product's research and Development (R &D). In 
the first stage the production, product is designed, developed and produced 
locally in the home market in limited number. Subsequently, after the 
establishment of the product in the home market, the foreign demand is mostly 
met by undertaking export.  
In the second stage the production, manufactured goods became „mature‟. In the 
second stage of production, the price elasticity of demand for the product is 
comparatively low. The demand for the product increases in the foreign market 
and competitors appear in the international market. At this stage, producers begin 
manufacturing in the foreign country to supply products in the foreign market 
and try to decline costs with international production to compete with the 
competitors. Therefore, in the second stage the firm becomes international.  
In the final stage product become standardized. The production technique 
becomes well known and reaches to the most of the competitors. Firms moved 
their production to lower cost and lower wage countries. The product is exported 
to the original country of innovation where the product is phased out in order to 
favour innovation of new product. Thus, the exporter becomes importer in this 
stage of production and national market will have to import relatively capital 
intensive products from low income countries. 
According to product life cycle theory, when a new product is introduced in the 
market, its production process requisite highly skilled labour but as product 
matures or become standardized then production process required less skilled 
labour. Therefore, comparative advantage shifts from developed countries to less 
developed countries. The main example of product life cycle theory is the 
evaluation of Xerox photo-copier manufacturing plants which started originally 
in the USA in the 1940s and 1950s. In the first stage of production Xerox 
                                                 
1This hypothesis states that MNCs (Multinational Corporations) attempt to jump over tariff or 
non-tariff barriers by establishing foreign subsidiaries. 


--- Page 28 ---
 
 
 
80 
Modern Theories of  
International Trade exported its products then it shifted its manufacturing plant first to Europe and 
finally, as the technology matured, it shifted its manufacturing plant in India in 
the year 1970s and 1980s.  
Product life cycle theory does not apply in all conditions; mainly products with 
small life span may not go through the life cycle described in this theory. 
Secondly, this theory does not hold true in the cases of luxury goods, whose 
perceived value mainly depend on marketing campaigns.  
4.3  ECONOMICS OF SCALE AND 
INTERNATIONAL TRADE 
One of the significant incentives for international trade is the productivity 
enhancements that can arise because of economies of scale in production. After 
1980‟s trade economists introduced the concept of economies of scale under new 
trade theory. One of the main assumptions of the Heckscher-Ohlin model was 
that products are produced under condition of constant return to scale, but the 
new trade theory assumes increasing return to scale, where output grows more 
than the increase in inputs or factors of production. 
According to Economies of scale concept, the per -unit cost of producing a 
product falls as the scale of production rises holding input prices as 
constant. Therefore, larger production reflects a lower cost due to the 
specialization e.g. , China ma ke production at larger scale which lowers down 
production cost and prices of many goods. As a result of lower cost, prices of the 
commodities get lower and exported to other countries. Economies of scale, 
specialization and trade can enhance in the world productivity and welfare 
benefits that accrue to all trading partners. 
The main assumption of this concept is under economies of scale, trade between 
two countries does not depend on country differences. Indeed, it is likely that 
countries could be equal in all respects and yet find it advantageous to trade. 
Thus, economies-of-scale models are frequently used to explicate trade among 
countries like the USA, Japan, and the European Union. Both the countries and 
EU and other advanced countries have similar technologies, similar endowments, 
and to some extent similar preferences. Expending classical models of trade, 
these countries would have little reason to involve in trade. However, trade 
between the advanced countries makes up a significant share of world trade. 
Economies of scale can provide an answer for this type of trade. 
The idea of economies of scale can be explained by figure 4.1. Let us assume that 
two countries India and China are similar in every aspect and producing two 
commodities, wheat and cloth. In the absence of Trade India produces and 
consume at point A and China at point A 1. With trade, India could specialize 
completely in the production of commodity wheat as India has comparative 
advantage in the production of wheat. Similarly, China can specialize in the 
production of Cloth as China has comparative advantage in the production of 


--- Page 29 ---
 
 
 
81 
Alternative 
Explanations of 
Trade  
Cloth. By exchanging 110  quantity of wheat to 70 quantities of cloth with each 
other, India ends up consuming at E,  and gains 20 quantities of wheat and 10 
quantities of Cloth, while the China ends up consuming at E 1 and gains 30 
quantities of Wheat and 10 quantities of Cloth. Thus,  both the countries get extra 
quantities of commodities when they specialize in the production as it creates 
economies of scale in the production.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.1: Trade based on Economies of Scale 
Linder in 1961 developed an advanced hypothesis similar to economies of scale 
where he explain ed nation exports those manufactured goods for which a big 
domestic market exists. As there is more demand in domestic market, in the 
process of satisfying such a market, country obtains the necessary experience and 
efficiency. This experience and efficiency in manufacturing of these products 
further converts into increasing export of these commodities to other countries 
that have similar tastes, preferences and income level. The nation will import 
those commodities that appeal to its low and high income minorities. According 
to this overlapping demand hypothesis,  trade in manufactures is likely to be 
largest among countries with similar tastes and income levels. 
Check Your Progress 1 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  What is meant by technological gap model? Discuss the pattern of 
international trade according to technological gap model. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
Wheat 
70 
A 
E 
120 
110 
 180 
0 
90 
India 
60 
Cloth 
Wheat 
50 
A1 
E1 
120 
60 
 70 
0 
40 
China 
40 
Cloth 
