--- Page 11 ---
 
 
 
63 
Intra-Industry 
Trade 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 
3.2: Effect of trade on real wage and consumption 
The intersection of AB and PQ curves determine the equilibrium values of (p /w) 
and c. The equilibrium number of products (N) is determined as follows:  
 
 
                                                                                         (6) 
where L is to total labour force in the country. The assumption of symmetry 
means that all firms are alike and hence we can simply replace the summation 
sign 







N
i 1  with N. The term y is replaced as L c as total output of each variety (y) 
is equal to the total demand for each variety (L c). Therefore, given L and the 
fixed parameters α and β, the value of N is endogenously determined once the 
equilibrium value of c is known. Thus, equilibrium in the closed economy is fully 
determined.  
What will happen when the home country `A' opens trade with the foreign 
country `B', which is identical with `A' in every way?  In the H-O-S setting, there 
is no reason for these countries to engage in trade as firms in the two countries 
are symmetric (prices and quantities are identical across varieties in the two 
countries). But the story is different in the present model in that trade in 
differentiated commodities will take place even if identical ranges of varieties are 
p
roduced in both countries in autarky. The reasoning for this goes as follows. In 
the absence of trade barriers, countries A and B together constitute an `integrated 
economy' (a term to represent two or more open economies combined), which is 
equivalent to twice the size of either of the two countries. Firms in this 
„integrated economy‟ have no incentive to produce the same varieties as other 
firms because every variety enters into consumer's utility function symmetrically. 
Since no two firms produce the same variety, each variety will be produced in 
only one country. At the same time, all varieties are demanded in both the 
countries, which necessitate international trade in different varieties of the same 
commodity Y and hence IIT.   
 
11
( ) ( ) ( )
11
( ) ( ) /
NN
i i i
ii
L L y N y N Lc
LN Lc Lc L Lc
     
    

      
   

p/w 
c 
A 
B 
Q 
P 
Q* 
P* 
c0 
c1 
(p/w)
(p/w)


--- Page 12 ---
 
 
 
64 
Modern Theories of  
International Trade Two identical countries trading is just like doubling the population L, which will 
have no impact on AB curve. However, the PQ curve will shift down (see 
equations 4 and 5).  As a result of this shift the following changes occur: (i) 
consumption of each variety falls from c 0 to c 1 ; (ii) p/w falls from (p/w) 0 to 
(p/w)1 which means that real wage w/p rises; (iii) number of varieties (N) 
available to consumers in each country increases due to the rise in the total 
number of consumers (L in integrated economy) and fall in the consumption of 
each variety (see equation 6); (iv) output produced by each firm (y) increases
1; 
and (v) number of varieties produced in each country falls. The last result means 
though the number of varieties available to consumers in each country go up, the 
number of varieties produced in each country falls. The number of varieties 
produced should necessarily decline in order to satisfy the employment condition 
in each country.  
 
                           (7) 
 
Given that productive resources in each country (L) remains constant, an increase 
in the value of y means that N should necessarily fall. While the number of 
varieties produced in each country falls, the sum of varieties from both countries 
under free trade exceeds the number in any single country before trade. Larger 
number of varieties for consumption means that consumers in each country 
clearly gains from trade. Higher real wages are another source of gains from 
trade in this model. The model shows that trade liberalization leads to a „scale 
effect‟ (surviving firms expand their outputs) as well as a „selection effect‟ (some 
firms are forced to exit). 
Ideal variety approach developed by Lancaster (1980) and Helpman (1981) differ 
from Krugman's model in that the symmetry assumption of the utility function is 
not used. Instead, in this approach, every consumer residing in the country A is 
assumed to have preference for an ideal variety. Consumers differ in terms of the 
most preferred variety, but the assumption of equal density of preferences implies 
that the same aggregate demand exists for every variety. The supply side is 
characterised by free entry and exit, identical cost function for all varieties, and 
the existence of scale economies in the production of every variety.  Because of 
the existence of scale economies, the number of varieties produced cannot be 
infinite suggesting that some consumers will be unable to get their ideal variety. 
Firms entering the market must decide on the particular variety and price. Profit 
maximising behaviour will ensure that no two firms will produce the same 
                                                 
1 This is evident from equation (5). Since p/w falls while α and β remain constant , it is clear that 
Lc =  y  should necessarily increase.   
()
()
L N y
LN y



 


--- Page 13 ---
 
 
 
65 
Intra-Industry 
Trade variety in equilibrium.  Also, in equilibrium, each variety will be produced in the 
same quantity, will be sold at the same price and each firm will earn zero profit. 
This situation is referred to as perfect monopolistic competition.  
Now, consider the possibility of trade with a foreign country B which is identical 
with `A' in every way. The symmetry assumption will ensure that the autarkic 
equilibrium features of A and B are identical and the `integrated economy‟ is 
equivalent to twice the size of either of the two countries. Also, in the „integrated 
economy‟, each variety will be produced by only  one firm and therefore in only 
one country. All varieties will, however, be consumed in both countries, giving 
rise to IIT.  
The basic models outlined above have been extended by integrating them with 
the H-O-S approach to international trade. Generally, this has been done by 
introducing a second output sector (such as, agriculture, producing a homogenous 
good under conditions of constant returns) and cross-country differences in factor 
endowments. The integrated models predict that trade based on comparative 
advantage and trade based on scale economies will take place side by side. 
Check Your Progress 3 
Note: 
i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  What is the effect of intra-industry trade on real wage and consumption? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) What will happen when the home country „A‟ opens trade with the foreign 
country `B', which is identical to „A‟? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3.3.3. IIT in Vertically Differentiated Commodities 
The horizontal models are considered to be of greater relevance for 
understanding the occurrence of bilateral IIT among developed countries. A 
different approach pertaining to IIT between countries with clearly different 
factor endowments takes its point of departure in vertical product differentiation. 
Most economists formulated models of vertical IIT without recourse to 
economies of scale. In general, these models predict the pattern of IIT along the 
lines similar to the pattern of inter-industry trade predicted in the conventional 
trade model, according the central role to factor endowment differences. What 
follows is a brief discussion of the essential elements of the vertical models. 


--- Page 14 ---
 
 
 
66 
Modern Theories of  
International Trade Falvey (1981) adopt ed a partial equilibrium approach by concentrating on trade 
within a single industry, which is assumed to posses a stock of industry specific 
capital and produces a continuum of products differentiated by quality. Higher 
quality products are characterised by higher capital labour ratio used in their 
production. Therefore, the comparative advantages of capital abundant countries 
lie on the higher ends of the quality spectrum and that of labour abundant 
countries lie on the lower ends. Vertical IIT between two countries will arise 
given an overlap in the demand for different qualities and this possibility is 
enhanced the greater is the factor endowment difference between the countries. 
Assuming that relative capital abundance is reflected in relative income per 
capita, the model suggests a hypothesis contrary to what emerges from the 
horizontal models. That is, the intensity of IIT will be positively correlated with 
the per capita income differences between the trading partners. Another testable 
hypothesis, which emerges from the model, is that the shares of IIT vary 
inversely with the levels of trade restriction of partner countries. 
The supply side in the Falvey and Kierzkowski (1987) model is a close 
descendant of Falvey (1981), the demand side being fully elaborated in the 
former. Each individual is assumed to demand only one type of differentiated 
product and given relative prices,
 this preferred quality is determined uniquely by 
the individual's income. Since the aggregate income of an economy is not equally 
distributed, there is, at any point in time, an aggregate demand for a variety of 
differentiated goods. This holds well in the `integra ted economy‟ as well and 
consequently vertical IIT will emerge, the intensity of which being higher the 
more dissimilar (in income distribution) are the trading countries. The model also 
suggests that the shares of IIT will be positively correlated with the market size 
of countries.  
In the preceding models, capital assumes the decisive role among the factors of 
production in determining the product specification. Whereas, Flam and Helpman 
(1987), in their model, ascribe the central role to labour. According to them, 
population in every country is characterised by a non-degenerate distribution of 
skills and differences in skills are reflected in differences in the endowment of 
effective labour supply. Higher quality products are characterised by relatively 
larger inputs of labour used in their production and the pattern of IIT reflects 
differences in technology and in income distribution.  
A strikingly different mode of analysis focuses on the markets where R&D 
expenditure (considered a sunk cost) is a prerequisite to quality improvement. 
Given that the average variable cost rises only slowly with quality, the number of 
firms in the market is bounded; by extending the distribution of income the upper 
bound on the number of firms increases, however. Thus, the `integrated economy' 
can support a large number of firms if the two countries are more dissimilar in 
income distribution. The higher income country specialises in higher quality 
products and the lower income country specialises in lower quality products 
resulting in vertical IIT.  


--- Page 15 ---
 
 
 
67 
Intra-Industry 
Trade 3.3.4. IIT in Intermediate Products 
Ethier (1979, 1982) focuses on the significance of three important aspects to 
international trade: international returns to scale, product differentiation in 
producer goods and interdependence of world industrial activity. He points out 
that scale economies resulting from an increased division of labour depend on the 
size of the world market rather than the production level in any one country. The 
interdependence of world industrial activity implies global dispersion of the 
distinct operations consisting of production process in an industry, which in turn 
depends on the efficiency gains from increased specialisation.   
The analysis produces a model of IIT in intermediate products, wherein the desire 
for product variety arises as a consequence of larger markets permitting greater 
division of labour. This is in contrast with the models discussed earlier wherein 
the desire for product variety arises from consumer preference. The analysis 
further demonstrates that internal scale economies and product differentiation are 
not the only factors determining the degree of intra-industry trade. 
In agreement with the horizontal models, Ethier's model also predicts that 
similarities of factor endowments between nations tend to promote IIT.  Also, if 
differentiated intermediate goods are tradable, the analysis of trade pattern is 
similar to that of differentiated final goods. 
3.3.5. IIT in Identical Commodities 
The usual approach to IIT is to assume that such trade arises because slightly 
different commodities are produced and traded to satisfy the desire for variety.  
However, Brander (1981) and Brander and Krugman (1983) have shown that 
there are reasons to expect IIT even in identical products. In their models, the 
pattern of trade is determined by the interaction of increasing returns to scale, 
transport costs, and oligopolistic behaviour of international firms. A Cournot 
strategy is assumed in which each firm maximises profit assuming the output of 
other fi
rms in each market (domestic and foreign) remains the same. The market 
equilibrium involves IIT despite the fact that both countries A and B (symmetric) 
produce identical commodities, and there is an obvious loss due to transport 
costs. (Transport costs, h owever, should not be too high. As transport costs fall, 
the proportion of foreign goods in domestic consumption increases.)  IIT is the 
result of what is called “reciprocal dumping"(also called "cross -hauling"), i.e., 
each firm dumps into other firm's hom e market. The term "dumping" is because 
the f.o.b price of export is less than the domestic price. The firm's incentive to 
bear the higher effective marginal cost (including transport costs) associated with 
exporting stems from the possibility of its marginal revenue in the foreign market 
exceeding that in the domestic market because the market share of each firm in 
the foreign country is smaller than that in the home country. This is an 
equilibrium situation because imperfectly competitive firms set margin al revenue 
equal to marginal costs in different markets.  The drawback of this model is that 


--- Page 16 ---
 
 
 
68 
Modern Theories of  
International Trade the Cournot assumption ignores strategic interdependence of firms usually 
observed in oligopolistic markets. In particular, the ability of this model to 
explain the pattern of IIT in the context of developing countries is suspect.       
Check Your Progress 4 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Describe Intra-Industry trade in Intermediate goods. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) What could be the possible reasons behind IIT in identical products? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3) Discuss the relevance of vertical IIT. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3.4  MEASUREMENT OF IIT 
Two major issues in the empirical analysis of IIT are concerned with: (i) the 
definition of „industry‟ and (ii) measurement of IIT. The measurement issues 
were subjected to controversies ever since they were first raised and now there 
exists some professional consensus on most of the issues.  
3.4.1  Defining `Industry’ and the Problem of Categorical 
Aggregation 
Operationalizing the concept of „industry‟ is vital for the empirical analysis of 
IIT. It is, however, easier said than done, as there is no agreed single definition of 
„industry‟. Mainly, two criteria have been followed in economic analysis. The 
first considers different products as belonging to a single industry if they are 
good substitutes in production, while the second criterion is related to the extent 
of substitutability of products in consumption.  
A major issue for the empirical analysis is that the criteria for official trade 
classification do not coincide exactly with the criteria for products to constitute 
IIT.  The problem of categorical aggregation arises as a result of the inclusion in 
a single trade category of products, which either have different production 


--- Page 17 ---
 
 
 
69 
Intra-Industry 
Trade functions or have different end uses. Importantly, the extent of IIT, as estimated 
by the usual measures is sensitive to the level of aggregation (of products) which 
defines an industry: higher levels of aggregation usually give rise to greater 
extent of recorded IIT. The use of a more detailed classification system for the 
measurement of IIT does not necessarily solve the problem because it would tend 
to separate commodities that are good substitutes in production and consumption.  
Thus, the degree and kind of homogeneity of commodity items under each trade 
category need to be considered for the purpose of empirical analysis. The most 
common practice is to select a specific level of statistical aggregation in the 
official classification as the best approximation to the concept of industry. Now, 
there exists a professional consensus to consider the products grouped under 4 or 
6
-digit level of Harmonized System (HS) of Classification as roughly 
corresponding with the concept of an industry. In general, commodities grouped 
under a particular 4 or 6-digit code may be close substitutes in production, 
consumption or both. First, there may be products traded having similar input 
requirements, are close substitutes in production, but not in consumption. 
Secondly, there are products traded that are close substitutes in consumption, but 
not in production.  A third category involves very similar goods, which are close 
substitutes in consumption and production. Finally, the exchange of absolutely 
identical products can also be found. In practice, the simultaneous exchange in 
these four types of commodities is considered as IIT, while other types of 
transactions constitute inter industry trade. 
3.4.2  Measuring the Intensity of IIT 
The intensity of IIT is usually measured by using the well-known Grubel Lloyd 
(GL) index: 
 
  ,100M X
M X M XGL
i i
i i i i
i 
  
    (8) 
where GLi is the IIT index for industry i , and X  i  and M  i  are  values of exports 
and imports in industry i . The value of GL i  ranges from 0 to 100. If there is no 
IIT (i.e., one of X i or M i  is zero) GLi  takes a value 0. If all trade is IIT (i.e., Xi  = 
Mi), GLi takes a value of 100. Grubel and Lloyd (1975) proposed the following 
weighted index to arrive at an aggregate measure of IIT: 
  
  .100M X
M X M XGL
i i
i i i i
 
   
    (9) 
The following features of Grubel Lloyd index are worth noting.  
1) GLi is independent of the absolute value of exports and imports, thus it does 
not allow conclusion on the absolute value of IIT. 
2) GLi  is symmetric in the rise in exports and imports, thus it could rise due to a 
rise in either exports or imports or both. 


--- Page 18 ---
 
 
 
70 
Modern Theories of  
International Trade 3) GLi is non-linear in changes, so a small alteration in the coefficient would 
disguise a big change in trade volumes and vice versa. 
4) GLi  i s subject to aggregation problems. Grubel and Lloyd argue that "…the 
measure of IIT at a more aggregative level is greater than, or at least no less 
than, the measured intra-industry trade with a finer commodity breakdown".   
5) Grubel and Lloyd observed that GL is a biased downward measure of IIT if 
the country's total commodity trade is not balanced or if the mean is an 
average of some subset of all industries for which exports are not equal to 
imports. They considered this an undesirable feature of a measure of average 
IIT and suggested the need for correcting for trade imbalance. They proposed 
to use an adjusted measure. Although, many economists disagree with the 
idea of adopting adjusted measure. 
Check
 Your Progress 5 
Note: i) Use the space given below for your answers. 
ii) Check your progress with those answers given at the end of the unit. 
1)  Describe Grubel Lloyd (GL) index for Measuring the Intensity of IIT. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
2) What were the major issues in the empirical analysis of IIT? 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………. 
3.5  LET US SUM UP 
In this unit, we discussed about Intra industry trade and how trade liberalization 
has supported its growth. IIT means the simultaneous export and import of 
products, which are very close substitutes for each other in terms of factor inputs 
and consumption. Growth of IIT is an outcome of greater specialisation in the 
manufacturing of unique varieties or product lines by the individual plants in 
different countries.   In a liberalized environment, intensity of IIT has increased 
in most of the countries. In absence of trade barriers,
 IIT has increased in many 
industries. 
We also distinguished between the two types of IIT – horizontal and vertical IIT. 
Horizontal IIT refers to the simultaneous export and import of the differentiated 
products within an industry which are of a similar quality. Vertical IIT, on the 


--- Page 19 ---
 
 
 
71 
Intra-Industry 
Trade other hand, refers to the exchange of differentiated products that are of different 
qualities. While discussing the theories of Intra-Industry Trade, we also discussed 
about the need for separate theory for Intra-Industry Trade. We discussed about 
„love for variety‟ and „ideal variety approach‟ in case of horizontal IIT. We also 
discussed about IIT in identical goods and intermediate goods. We further 
discussed about the major issues in the empirical analysis of IIT and Grubel 
Lloyd (GL) index for measuring the Intensity of IIT. 
3.6  SOME USEFUL REFERENCES 
Abed-el-Rahman, K. (1991) „Firms‟ Competitive and National Comparative 
Advantages as Joint Determinants of Trade Composition‟, Weltwirtschaftliches 
Arch
iv, 127, 83-97. 
Aquino, A. (1978) „Intra-Industry Trade and Intra-Industry Specialisation as 
Concurrent Sources of International Trade in Manufactures‟, 
Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 114, 275-95.
 
Balassa, B. (1966) „Tariff Reductions and Trade in Manufactures among the 
Industrial Countries‟, American Economic Review, 56, 466
-73.  
Balassa, B. (1979) „Intra -Industry Trade and the Integration of the Developing 
Countries in the World Economy‟, in Giers ch, H. (ed.) (1979) On the Economics 
of Intra-Industry Trade (Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr.). 
Bernhofen, D. M. (1999) „Intra -Industry Trade and Strategic Interaction: Theory 
and Evidence‟ Journal of International Economics, 47, 225-44. 
Brander, J. A. (1981) „Intra-Industry Trade in Identical Commodities‟, Journal of 
International Economics, 13, 313-21. 
Brander, J. A. and Krugman, P. R. (1983) „A Reciprocal Dumping Model of 
International Trade‟, Journal of International Economics, 13, 313-21. 
Dixit, A.K. and Stigli tz, J. (1977) „Monopolistic Competition and Optimum 
Product Diversity‟, American Economic Review, 67, 297-308. 
Dixit, A. K. and Norman, V. (1980) Theory of International Trade (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press). 
Eaton, J. and Kierzkowski, H. (1984) „Oligopolistic Competition, Product Variety 
and International Trade‟, in Kierzkowski, H (ed.), Monopolistic Competition and 
International Trade (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
Ethier, W. J. (1979) „Internationally Decreasing Costs and World Trade‟, Journal of 
International Economics, 9, 1-24.  
Ethier, W. J. (1982) „National and International Returns to Scale in the Modern 
Theory of International Trade‟, American Economic Review, 72, 389-405. 


--- Page 20 ---
 
 
 
72 
Modern Theories of  
International Trade Falvey, R. E. (1981) „Commercial Policy and Intra-I ndustry Trade‟, Journal 
International Economics, 11, 495-511. 
Falvey, R. E. and Kierzkowski, H. (1987) „Product Quality, Intra -industry Trade, 
and Imperfect competition‟, In Kierzkowski, H (ed.), Protection and Competition in 
International Trade (New York: Blackwell). 
Finger, J.M. (1975) „Trade Overlap and Intra-Industry Trade‟, Economic Inquiry, 
13, 581-89. 
Flam, H. and Helpman, E. (1987) „Vertical Product Differentiation and North -
South Trade‟, American Economic Review, 77, 810-822. 
Fontagne, L., Freudenb erg, M. (2002), „Long-term Trends in Intra-Industry 
Trade‟, in: Lloyd, P.J., Lee, H H. (eds.), Frontiers of Research on Intra-Industry 
Trade, (New York: Palgrave Macmillan). 
Fukao, K., Ishido , H and Ito, K (2003), „Vertical Intra -Industry Trade and 
Foreign Direct Investment in East Asia‟, Journal of the Japanese and 
International Economies 17, 468-506.   
Gray, H. P. (1979) „Intra-Industry Trade: The Effects of Different Levels of Data 
Aggregation‟, in Giersch, H. (ed.) (1979) On the Economics of Intra -Industry 
Trade (Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr.). 
Greenaway, D., and Milner, C. R. (1986) The Economics of Intra-Industry Trade 
(Oxford: Blackwell). 
Greenaway, D., Hine, R. and Milner, C. R. (1994) „Countr y Specific Factors and 
the Pattern of Horizontal and Vertical Intra- industry Trade in the UK‟, 
Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 130, 77-100.
 
Grubel, H. G., and Lloyd, P. J. (1975) Intra-Industry Trade (London: Macmillan). 
Helpman, E. (1981) „International Trad e in the Presence of Product 
Differentiation, Economies of Scale and Monopolistic Competition‟, Journal of 
International Economics, 11, 305-40. 
Helpman, E. and Krugman P. R. (1985) Market Structure and Foreign Trade: 
Increasing Returns, Imperfect Competition, and the International Economy  
(Cambridge: MIT Press).  
Helpman, E. (1998) „Explaining the Structure of Foreign Trade: Where Do We 
Stand‟, Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 134, 573-89. 
Hoekman, B., Djankov , S. (1997) „Determinants of the Export Structure of 
Countries in Central and Eastern Europe‟ The World Bank Economic Review  11, 
471-487. 
