--- Page 1 ---
MACROECONOMIC  
ANALYSIS 
Sc
hool of Social Sciences 
Indira Gandhi National Open University 
Maidan Garhi, New Delhi-110068
 MEC-102 


--- Page 2 ---
EXPERT COMMITTEE  
 
Prof. Romar Correa (retd.) 
University of Mubai 
Prof. Errol D’Souza  
Indian Institute of Ahmedabad 
Prof. M Ramachandran 
Pondicherry University 
Prof. Ashima Goyal 
Indira Gandhi Institute of 
Development Research, Mumbai 
Prof. Subrata Guha   
CESP, Jawaharlal Nehru University 
New Delhi 
Prof. Mita K Mehra 
CITD, Jawaharlal Nehru University 
New Delhi 
Prof. Gopinath Pradhan (retd.) 
Indira Gandhi National Open 
University, New Delhi 
Prof. Narayan Prasad 
Indira Gandhi National Open 
University, New Delhi 
Prof. B S Prakash 
Indira Gandhi National Open 
University, New Delhi 
Prof. Kaustuva Barik 
Indira Gandhi National Open 
University, New Delhi 
Saugato Sen 
Indira Gandhi National Open 
University, New Delhi 
 
 
COURSE PREPARATION TEAM 
 
Block/ Unit Title Unit Writer 
Block 1 Traditional Approaches to Macroeconomics  
Unit 1 The Classical Approach Dr. Jagannath Mallick, Independent Researcher, New Delhi 
Unit 2 The Keynesian Model  Prof. Ananya Ghosh Dastidar, University of Delhi 
Prof. Kaustuva Barik, IGNOU Unit 3 Neoclassical Synthesis 
Unit 4 Open Economy Macroecon. - I  Prof. Ananya Ghosh Dastidar, Department of Business and Finance, 
University of Delhi 
Unit 5 Open Economy Macroecon. - II 
Block 2 Expectations and Macroeconomics 
Unit 6 Inflation and Unemployment Prof. Kaustuva Barik, IGNOU 
Unit 7  Rational Expectations  Dr. Manjula Singh, St. Stephens College, University of Delhi 
Block 3 Intertemporal Decision-Making  
Unit 8 Consumption and Asset Prices  
Prof. Mausumi Das, Delhi School of Economics, Delhi Unit 9 Ramsey-Cass-Koopmans Model  
Unit 10 Overlapping Generations Model 
Block 4 Theories of the Business Cycles  
Unit 11 Traditional Models of Business 
Cycles 
Dr. Archi Bhatia, Associate Professor, Ramjas College, University of 
Delhi 
Dr. Jagannath Mallick, Independent Researcher, Delhi and Prof. 
Kaustuva Barik, IGNOU 
Unit 12 Real Business Cycles  
Block 5 Labour Markets  
Unit 13 Nominal and Real Rigidities  
Prof. Avadhhot Nadkarni (retd.), University of Mumbai 
 Unit 14 Search Theory and 
Unemployment  
Block 6 Issues in Monetary Policy  
Unit 15 Central Banks and the Supply of 
Money 
Dr. Jagannath Mallick, Independent Researcher, Delhi 
 
Unit 16 Conduct of Monetary Policy  Prof. Kaustuva Barik and Ms. Apica Sharma, IGNOU 
Unit 17 Theory of Monetary Policy  Dr. Vineet Kohli, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai 
Block 7 Fiscal Policy and Macroeconomics  
Unit 18 Fiscal Policy Dr. Archi Bhatia, Associate Professor, Ramjas College, University of 
Delhi Unit 19 Fiscal Sustainability  
 
Course Coordinator: Prof. Kaustuva Barik           
 


--- Page 3 ---
PRINT PRODUCTION  
July, 2023 
© Indira Gandhi National Open University, 2023 
ISBN: 
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be produced in any form, by mimeography or any other means, without 
permission in writings from the Indira Gandhi National Open University. 
Further information on the Indira Gandhi National Open University courses may be obtained from the University’s office at 
Maidan Garhi, New Delhi -110068 or visit our website: http://www.ignou.ac.in  
Printed and published on behalf of the Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi, by Registrar, MPDD. 
Laser Typeset: Mr. Mukesh Yadav    Cover Design: Mr. Sandeep Maini Printed at:  
 
  


--- Page 4 ---
CONTENTS 
BLOCK 1 TRADITIONAL APPROACHES TO 
MACROECONOMICS 
Page 
Unit 1 The Classical Approach 7 
Unit 2  The Keynesian Model 27 
Unit 3  Neoclassical Synthesis  54 
Unit 4  Open Economy Macroeconomics - I 70 
Unit 5  Open Economy Macroeconomics - II 81 
BLOCK 2 EXPECTATIONS AND MACROECONOMICS 
Unit 6 Inflation and Unemployment 94 
Unit 7  Rational Expectations 105 
BLOCK 3 INTERTEMPORAL DECISION-MAKING 
Unit 8 Consumption and Asset Prices 124 
Unit 9 Ramsey-Cass-Koopmans Model  137 
Unit 10 Overlapping Generations Model 153 
BLOCK 4 THEORIES OF BUSINESS CYCLES 
Unit 11 Traditional Models of Business Cycles 164 
Unit 12 Real Business Cycles  184 
BLOCK 5 LABOUR MARKETS 
Unit 13 Nominal and Real Rigidities 199 
Unit 14 Search Theory and Unemployment  221 
BLOCK 6 ISSUES IN MONETARY POLICY 
Unit 15 Central Banks and the Supply of Money 235 
Unit 16 Conduct of Monetary Policy  249 
Unit 17 Theory of Monetary Policy  262 
BLOCK 7 FISCAL POLICY AND MACROECONOMICS 
Unit 18 Fiscal Policy 278 
Unit 19 Fiscal Sustainability 292 
Glossary 305 


--- Page 5 ---
COURSE INTRODUCTION 
Macroeconomics analyses and establishes functional relationships among economy level 
aggregates. Aggregative analysis has assumed such a great significance in recent times that a 
prior understanding of macroeconomic theoretical structure is considered essential for proper 
comprehension of various issues and policies. Macroeconomics now is not only a scientific 
method of analysis but also a body of empirical economic knowledge. 
After going through this course a student is expected to  
 have an intuitive understanding of the theoretical developments in macroeconomics; 
 contrast among various schools of macroeconomic thought;  
 analyse real world issues with the help of macroeconomic theories; and 
 apply macroeconomic theory to empirical data. 
The course comprises seven blocks. 
Block 1, entitled Traditional Approaches to Macroeconomics , is somewhat introductory in 
nature. After explaining some basic concepts that are used frequently in macroeconomics and 
form building blocks of the subject, it presents the classical and Keynesian views on 
determination of output and employment in an economy. Subsequently, it presents a synthesis 
of the classical and Keynesian ideas through the tools of IS-LM curves. The block also deals 
with issues pertaining to open economy macroeconomics.   
Block 2, entitled Expectations and Macroeconomics, deals with issues such as inflation and 
unemployment. It traces the evolution of Phillips Curve – how it originated as a relationship 
between real and monetary variables; how it occupied a prime place as an analytical tool in 
Keynesian economics; and how it became irrelevant in the new-classical economics. In the 
course of discussion, this block deals with two important concepts, viz., adaptive expectations 
and rational expectations.   
Block 3, entitled Intertemporal Decision-making, analyses the behavior of economic agents 
such as households and firms in an inter-temporal framework. It discusses the Ramsey-Cass-
Koopmans model and overlapping-generations model. It also looks into issues such as the 
choice between work and leisure on the part of households.  
Block 4 , entitled Theories of Business Cycles , is devoted to the analysis of economic 
fluctuations in an economy, particularly the business cycles. It begins with traditional theories 
of business cycles and later moves on to real business cycles models with inter-temporal 
substitution and the propagation mechanism. 
Block 5 , entitled Labour Markets , discusses issues related to unemployment in the 
economy. Apart from presenting nominal and real rigidities, the block throws lights on search 
theories and unemployment. 
The subject matter of Block 6 is Issues in Monetary Policy . It deals with issues such as 
money supply, conduct of monetary policy, and theory of monetary policy. In recent years 


--- Page 6 ---
inflation targeting, policy rules, and dynamic consistency have been important concerns of 
policy makers.   
Block 7 , entitled Fiscal Policy and Macroeconomics , looks into the implications fiscal 
policy in an economy. Debt sustainability and Ricardian equivalence are two important issues 
discussed in this Block.  


--- Page 7 ---
 
 
UNIT 1 THE CLASSICAL APPROACH 
Structure 
1.0 Objectives 
1.1 Introduction 
1.2 Various Schools of Macroeconomic Thought 
1.3 Basic Features of Classical Theory 
1.4  Determination of Output and Employment  
1.5 Quantity Theory of Money  
1.6 Say’s Law of Market  
1.7 Classical Dichotomy  
1.7.1 AD-AS Equilibrium  
1.7.2 Neutrality of Money 
1.7.3 Saving-Investment Equilibrium  
1.8  Long Run vs. Short Run 
1.9  Let Us Sum Up 
1.10  Answers/ Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
1.11Some Useful Books/ Further Readings 
1.1 OBJECTIVES 
After going through the unit, you should be in a position to 
 bring out the salient features of classical economics; 
 analyse the classical approach to the determination output and employment; 
 explain the quantity theory of money and its implication on price 
determination;  
 explain the classical dichotomy in the economy and the neutrality of money 
in a classical system; and 
 describe the behavior of prices in the long-run and short-run.  
1.1 INTRODUCTION 
Being a student of economics, you must be aware that macroeconomic theory has 
evolved over time in response to the dynamic macroeconomic environment. 
Initially, during the nineteenth and early twentieth century, there was a consensus 
among economists and economic historians that an economy could run smoothly 
without much fluctuation in income, output and  employment. The perception 
 
 Dr. Jagannath Mallick, Independent Researcher, New Delhi writer 


--- Page 8 ---
 
8 
 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics 
was that there should be minimum state intervention in economic variables such 
as wages, prices and interest rates. The market forces (supply and demand) would 
take care of economic equilibrium in an economy. Such an assumption, however, 
is unrealistic – all governments have in place certain economic policies (such as 
monetary policy and fiscal policy) and they carry out amendments to these 
policies from time to time!  
Economic theory refers to a set of ideas and principles which are used to explain, 
analyse and predict certain ‘phenomenon’ or observable events. As you know, 
macroeconomic theory deals with macroeconomic phenomena, which are 
aggregative in nature. The need for a special branch of macroeconomics arises 
because what holds for the individual units may not hold good for the economy 
as a whole. For example, suppose a firm employs labour for production of output 
(say, cement). It can hire as many workers it requires at the ongoing wage rate. 
Thus, increase in demand for labour by a single firm does not have any impact on 
the wage rate. However, if all the firms in a country increase their demand for 
labour (say due to economic boom and optimism in the country), there will be 
shortage of labour and increase in wage rate. Further, the number of workers 
available for work in the country is limited; thus demand for labour beyond this 
limit will increase wage rate only, not the supply of labour.  
Let us look into the global energy crisis of 2022. This took the form of global 
shortages and increased the prices of oil, gas and electricity throughout the world. 
The crisis was caused by a variety of social and economic factors: labour 
shortages, political disputes, climate concerns, and the war between Russia and 
Ukraine. The world economy responds to such crises in certain ways. During the 
global energy crisis of 2022, for example, the oil-exporting countries witnessed 
an increased inflow of income while petroleum-importing countries experienced 
a rise in the cost of production. There was severe inflation in most countries. In 
order to control inflation, policy makers resorted to increase in interest rates and 
reduction in money supply.  
Countries design their monetary and fiscal policies for the welfare of people by 
controlling inflation and boosting economic growth. Macroeconomic theory 
guides economists and policymakers to explain the situation and design 
appropriate policy measures. Among economists, however, there is no agreement 
on how equilibrium levels of output, prices and employment are determined. 
Historically economic data are the same, but economists differ on the reasons and 
solution for economic problems. In microeconomics there is more or less some 
consensus. In macroeconomics, as you will see, there are sharp and often 
altogether different explanations and policy recommendations for the same 
phenomenon.  
Macroeconomics has been subjected to debates, particularly since the 1930s. The 
reasons behind such differences among economists are the basic assumptions and 
the models they take. Two major schools of thought – Classical and Keynesian – 
have interpreted economic events differently. Accordingly, they have accorded 


--- Page 9 ---
 
9 
 
The Classical    
Approach 
different explanations for the same economic issue. In this unit, we focus on the 
classical theories while Keynesian theories will be discussed in Unit 2. 
1.2 VARIOUS SCHOOLS OF MACROECONOMIC 
 THOUGHT 
A school of macroeconomic thought refers to a group of macroeconomic thinkers 
who share similar views on the behaviour of macroeconomic variables in an 
economy. As pointed out above, economists do not always share a similar 
approach in dealing with macroeconomic problems. For example, Keynesian 
theory came into existence as a response to the Great Depression. Further 
economic events during the 1970s led to the revival of the classical views in the 
form the New Classical Economics. As a response to New Classical economics, a 
new school of thought – New Keynesian Economics – was born by introducing 
micro-foundations and rational expectations in Keynesian economics. In later 
Units of this we will discuss about both these schools of thought. 
Classical economics refers to a school of thought prevalent during the eighteenth 
and early nineteenth century. They believed that the levels of economic variables 
in an economy were determined through market forces. It implies that wages, 
prices and interest rates are flexible in an economy. However, the occurrence of 
the Great Depression (1929-1933), which witnessed massive decline in income, 
output, employment and price level, a stock market crash, and banking panic 
falsified such assumptions. This led to the search for new explanations periodic 
fluctuations in output and employment in an economy. John Maynard Keynes, a 
British economist, opposed the classical ideas and advocated that prices and 
wages are not flexible; rather they are sticky. He coined the term “classical” to 
reflect the ideas presented by economists prior to him. Prominent among classical 
economists are Adam Smith, David Ricardo, Thomas Malthus, Anne Robert 
Jacques Turgot, John Stuart Mill, Jean-Baptiste Say, and Eugen Böhm von 
Bawerk.  
As opposed to the classical economists, Keynes advocated that the government 
should actively intervene in the market to counter recessionary conditions. From 
Keynes’s beliefs evolved a new school of macroeconomic thought that is called 
the Keynesian school. According to Keynesian economists, actual output could 
be lower than potential output of an economy and the gap can be closed through 
fiscal and monetary policy interventions. 
There are two major schools of thought: classical and Keynesian. Classical 
theory emerged in the 18 th and 19th centuries. It attempted to explain and analyse 
the remarkable increase in wealth. Classical theory relies on the assumption of 
fully flexible prices and wages, which results in an automatic adjustment in the 
market, ensuring no deficiency of aggregate demand. The economy operates at its 
full capacity or full employment level. These classical ideas failed to explain and 
understand the great depression of the 1930s. The depression had affected all the 
major advanced countries, wherein about one fourth of the labour force had 
become unemployed. Against this backdrop, John Maynard Keynes came up with 
his ideas, called Keynesian theory. He attempted to explain the event and 
advocated that such huge unemployment was because of inadequate aggregate 


--- Page 10 ---
 
10 
 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics 
demand, which in turn was the result of a deficiency in investment demand. He 
criticized the assumption of a laissez-faire economy in the classical theory and 
advocated policy intervention to increase demand and employment. 
Later, attempts were made to integrate ideas from both the schools, which led to 
the “neoclassical synthesis”. The IS-LM model that we discuss in Unit 3 is an 
outcome of the neoclassical synthesis. During the 1950s, economists such as 
Harrod, Domar and Kaldor extended the Keynesian ideas from short-run to long-
run. They argued that there would be an increase in production capacity in the 
long run because of large investments. This in turn would boost economic 
growth. The focus of these economists, called the Post-Keynesians, was to 
understand, explain and analyse economic growth. In order to overcome certain 
limitations of the post-Keynesian growth models, Robert M. Solow came up with 
the neoclassical growth model. You will go through these growth models in the 
course, ‘Economics of Growth and Development’.  
Keynesian school of thought dominated economic theory and policy after the 
World War II until the 1970s. During the 1970s most of the advanced economies 
witnessed stagnation and inflation, a situation called “stagflation”. Keynesian 
theories did not have appropriate policy response to stagflation, which led to the 
exploration of fresh explanations of economic behavior. Robert E. Lucas, an 
American economist, revived the classical ideas and countered the prevailing 
Keynesian thought. The ideas of classical and Keynesian schools differ from 
each other on various issues, including: i) the role played by demand and supply 
in determination of equilibrium output, employment and prices; ii) the 
assumption of flexibility of price level and wage rate in the economy; iii) the 
dichotomy of real and monetary sectors of the economy, and (iv) neutrality of 
money. 
After the 1970s, however, there was revival of classical economics in the form of 
new-classical theory. In response to that, new-Keynesian models came up. New 
Classical economics retained the basic characteristics of classical economics but 
introduced two new concepts: rational expectations and micro-foundations. We 
will cover these aspects in later units of this course.  
Along with these mainstream schools of thought, there is heterodox schools of 
thought or heterodox economics. It includes Marxist, Austrian, institutional, 
feminist and social economics among many others. In fact, there is a need for 
promoting pluralism in economics these days and researchers are venturing into 
many new areas. The mainstream or conventional economics, as mentioned, 
earlier have been Classical and Keynesian. The legacy of these two schools of 
thought have continued in different forms. Two prominent schools of thought in 
recent years have been New-Classical economics and New-Keynesian 
economics. There are certain common features of these two schools of thought: 
(i) general equilibrium models, (ii) micro-foundations in behaviour of economic 
agents, and (iii) rational expectations. Two major differences between both the 
schools of thought are: (i) the assumption regarding market structure – the new-
classical school assumes that there is perfect competition in the market while the 
new-Keynesian school assumes market imperfection. (ii) the assumption of 
flexibility in wages and prices – the new-classical school assumes flexibility in 
