--- Page 57 ---
 
 
 
57 
The Neoclassical 
Synthesis 
IS curve. An implication of the above is that any point outside the IS curve shows 
disequilibrium in the real sector. In Fig. 3.2 we consider two such points ‘c’ and 
‘d’ which are not on the IS curve, and find out their implications.  
 
Fig. 3.2: Disequilibrium in the Real Sector 
At point ‘c’ in Fig. 3.2, interest rate is 𝑖଴  while output is 𝑌ଵ  . Notice that at 𝑌ଵ  level 
of output, the equilibrium rate of interest should be 𝑖ଵ . Thus, the actual rate interest 
is higher than what it should. As a result, the aggregate demand will decrease 
(largely due to decrease in investment) and the rate of interest will decline. It 
implies that at point-c, there is excess supply of goods in the market. We can 
generalize that any point which is above and to the right of the IS curve, indicates 
excess supply of goods.  
Let us look at point ‘d’ which is below and to the left of the IS curve. At point ‘d’ 
in Fig. 3.2, income is at Y0 but the rate of interest is at 𝑖ଵ . Since the rate of interest 
is lower than the equilibrium rate of interest, the demand for investment will 
increase. Consequently, the rate of interest will rise upward. Thus, at point ‘d’ there 
is excess demand for goods. We can generalize that at any point below and to the 
left of the IS curve, there is excess demand for goods.  
3.2.2 Shift in the IS Curve 
The IS curve depicts the relationship between income and interest rate. Therefore, 
any change in other parameters or variables will result in a shift in the IS curve. 
The position and the slope of the IS curve depends upon the value of the parameters 
in equation (3.4). If the IS curve is flatter, the economy is more sensitive to interest 
rate – a small decrease in interest rate will lead to a large increase in income. On 
the other hand, a steeper IS curve implies insensitivity to interest rate change. 
There are two exogenous variables in equation (3.4), viz., G and T. In equation 
(3.4) we assumed that government expenditure and taxes are fixed. Thus, changes 
in taxes and government expenditure will also result in shifts in the IS curve. Let 
us look into equation (3.4). An increase in the value of 𝐺̅  will result in an increase 
in the intercept; thus, there will be an upward parallel shift in the IS curve. An 
increase in 𝑇ത, on the other hand, will decrease the intercept and shift the IS curve 
downward to the left.  


--- Page 58 ---
 
 
 
58 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics 
A change in the value of a parameter leads to a shift in the IS curve. An increase 
in autonomous consumption (the coefficient ‘a’ in equation (3.4)) or autonomous 
investment (the coefficient ‘c’ in equation (3.4)) will lead to a parallel shift of the 
IS curve upward to the right. A change in the marginal propensity to consume, 
however, will affect the slope of the IS curve.  
Check Your Progress 1 
1)  What will be the nature of change in the IS curve if there is a decrease in the 
propensity to consume? 
 ………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………… 
2)  What is the implication of the following on the position of the IS curve? 
(i) Decrease in autonomous government expenditure 
(ii) Decrease in tax rate 
 ………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………… 
3.3 EQUILIBRIUM IN THE MONETARY SECTOR  
The derivation of LM curve utilises the Keynesian view that speculative demand 
and transaction demand for money are separate. The speculative demand for 
money depends on the rate of interest while the transaction demand and the 
precautionary demand for money depend on the level of income. Thus, total 
demand for money (M) depends on both income (Y) and rate of interest (i). The 
demand for money in real terms (
ெ ೏
௉
) is given by 
𝐿 = 𝑘𝑌 − ℎ𝑖          … (3.5) 
where k > 0, h > 0; L is the demand for real balances (liquidity), Y is aggregate 
income and 𝑖 is the rate of interest. You should remember three issues about the 
monetary sector: (i) A person would like to deposit his money in bank and earn 
interest on it. The alternative is to hold on to the cash, where no interest income is 
earned. Thus, the opportunity cost of holding money is the interest foregone. If 
there is an increase in the rate of interest, the interest foregone increases. 
Conversely, if the rate of interest decreases, the interest income foregone 
decreases. Therefore, the demand for money is a downward-sloping curve, if we 
measure rate of interest on the y-axis and quantity of money on the x-axis. You 
may be familiar with the concept of liquidity trap; a situation where the rate of 
interest is very low, and people prefer to keep all their money in the form of liquid 
cash as the interest income foregone is negligible. (ii) The demand for real balances 
is described for a given level of income. We consider the money demand function 


--- Page 59 ---
 
 
 
59 
The Neoclassical 
Synthesis 
while keeping the level of income fixed (say, 𝐿(𝑌଴ )). If there is an increase in the 
level of income, there is an increase in the level of transactions and wealth in the 
economy, which in turn increases the demand for money. Thus, there will be a 
parallel shift in the money demand function. (iii) The supply of money is 
determined by the central bank and it is constant. Thus, the supply of money is a 
vertical straight line. If the supply of money is increased by the central bank, the 
vertical straight line will shift to the right. When we deal with the short-run, we 
assume that money supply does not change.  
3.3.1 Derivation of the LM Curve  
The supply of money in real terms is given by 
ெ ೞ
௉
. Equilibrium in the money market 
is achieved when 𝐿 = 𝑀 = 𝑀ഥ . Thus, equilibrium in the money market is given by 
ெഥ
௉ത = 𝑘𝑌 − ℎ𝑖          … (3.6) 
We can re-arrange terms in the above equation and obtain 
𝑌 = −
ଵ
௛
ெഥ
௉ത +
௛
௞ 𝑖        … (3.6a) 
There is a positive relationship between 𝑌  and 𝑖 in the LM curve. In order to find 
out the slope of equation (3.6) you have to express the equation in terms 𝑖 and find 
out the slope 
ௗ௜
ௗ௒ . You can find out the slope of the LM curve as 
௞
௛ . Depending upon 
the value of the parameters, the LM curve would be flatter or steeper. 
  
         Fig. 3.3: Derivation of the LM Curve 
In Fig. 3.3, Panel (a) we depict the equilibrium in the money market (or, in the 
monetary sector). We take demand for real balances (
ெ
௉ ) on the x-axis and the rate 
of interest on the y-axis. Let the money demand in the economy be given as 
ெ ೏
௉ (𝑌଴ )  
when the aggregate income is 𝑌଴ . In panel (a) of Fig. 3.3, this equilibrium is 
represented by point ‘a’. The equilibrium rate of interest and income are 𝑖଴  and 𝑌଴  
w respectively.  
Let there be an increase in the level of income from 𝑌଴  to 𝑌ଵ . Such an increase in 
income will lead to a parallel upward shift in the money demand function. We 


--- Page 60 ---
 
 
 
60 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics depict this money demand function as a dotted line 
ெ ೏
௉ (𝑌ଵ ) in Panel (a) of Fig. 3.3. 
With money supply remaining constant, an increase in aggregate demand will lead 
to a rise in the interest rate. The economy is now at equilibrium with output level 
𝑌ଵ and interest rate 𝑖ଵ . The intersection between the money supply function and the 
money demand function is denoted by point ‘b’ in Fig. 3.3, panel (a).   
In panel (b) of Fig. 3.3 we plot the LM curve by taking combinations of interest 
rate and aggregate income where the money market is in equilibrium. We have two 
such points, ‘a’ and ‘b’ in panel (a) of Fig. 3.3. You should note that the LM curve 
is the combination of all the points where the money market is in equilibrium. The 
LM curve is upward-sloping as you can see from the figure. An implication of the 
LM curve is that as income increases people want to hold more money, thus driving 
up the interest rate. If the speculative demand for money is perfectly elastic to 
interest rate (liquidity trap situation) the LM curve will be horizontal. On the other 
hand, if speculative demand is perfectly inelastic to interest rate, the LM curve will 
be vertical.  
To the left side of the LM curve there is excess supply of money (for example, 
point ‘c’ in Fig. 3.3 panel (b)). Excess supply in the money market implies that the 
demand for money is less than its supply. It means that people want to reduce the 
amount of liquid cash they possess. This induces people to buy bonds so that bond 
prices rise and rate of interest declines. A decline in the rate of interest restores 
equilibrium in the economy. To the right side of the LM curve, there is excess 
demand for money (for example, point ‘d’ in Fig. 3.3 panel (b)). Excess demand 
for money causes people to sell bonds (so that they can keep higher amount of 
liquid cash). This leads to a fall in bond prices and rise in the rate of interest. This 
way equilibrium in the monetary sector is restored.     
3.3.2 Shift in the LM Curve 
The position and the slope of the LM curve depend upon certain factors, including 
money supply. An increase in money supply shifts the LM curve to the right. As a 
result, at every level of output, the equilibrium rate of interest is lower than before. 
Thus, increase in money supply shifts the LM curve to the right. Conversely, a 
decrease in money supply will shift the LM curve to the left so that equilibrium 
rate of interest is higher at every level of output.  
3.4 SIMULTANEOUS EQUILIBRIUM OF REAL 
AND MONETARY SECTORS 
Now let us combine IS and LM curves as shown in Fig. 3.4. Such integration of 
IS-LM gives a unique combination of 𝑖 and 𝑌, which represents equilibrium in 
both real market and money market. In Fig. 3.4 we superimpose 𝐼𝑆଴  and 𝐿𝑀଴  in 
the same diagram. We measure income (Y) on the x-axis income (Y) and rate of 
interest on the y-axis. The equilibrium rate of interest and the equilibrium output 
level are given by 𝑖଴  and 𝑌଴  respectively.  


--- Page 61 ---
 
 
 
61 
The Neoclassical 
Synthesis 
 
Fig. 3.4: Simultaneous Equilibrium 
3.4.1 Shocks in the IS-LM Model 
Previously we have discussed about the factors that lead to a shift in the IS curve 
and the LM curve. Often the economy experiences exogenous demand shocks and 
supply shocks. Let us analyse the impact of such shocks in terms of the IS-LM 
model. Suppose there is a boom in the stock market, which changes the wealth of 
households. Such a situation will increase the level of consumption in the 
economy. Consequently, there will be an increase in aggregate expenditure and the 
IS curve will shift to the right from 𝐼𝑆଴  to 𝐼𝑆ଵ  (see Fig. 3.4). As a result, there is an 
increase in output from 𝑌଴  to 𝑌ଵ . A negative shock such as a decrease in business 
confidence of firms will shift the IS curve to the left. Such a left-ward shift in the 
IS curve will decrease output as well as interest rate. 
Let us consider another example. Suppose there is a series of online financial fraud 
cases in the country. This will send a negative signal to people – this will 
discourage people to keep their income in the formal system; there will be a decline 
in online transactions and the demand for money will increase. As a result, the LM 
curve will shift to the right from 𝐿𝑀଴  to 𝐿𝑀ଵ (see Fig. 3.4).  Consequently, there 
will be an increase in output from 𝑌଴  to 𝑌ଶ , and decrease in interest rate from 𝑖଴  to 
𝑖ଶ .  
You should note that the nature and extent of change in output and interest rate 
will depend upon the slope of the IS and LM curves. If the LM curve is flatter, 
monetary policy is quite effective. A small decrease in interest rate by the central 
bank will increase output by a large amount. If the LM curve is steeper, monetary 
policy will not be effective. In order to increase output by a small amount we will 
need a large decrease in the interest rate.  
3.4.2 Adjustment Process in the Economy 
A question arises at this point: What happens to the economy if it is operating at a 
point which is not at the intersection of the IS and LM curves? Does it 
automatically converge to the equilibrium point? Let us try to answer this question. 


--- Page 62 ---
 
 
 
62 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics 
If the economy is not operating at the unique point where the IS and LM curves 
intersect, there is disequilibrium in the economy. In that case an adjustment process 
starts and the economy moves to an equilibrium point. The following two issues 
are important in this context: 
a) If there is an excess demand for money (to the right of the LM curve), the 
interest rate will increase. The interest rate will fall in case we observe 
excess supply in the money market. Fall in interest rate will lead to increase 
in investment. Increase in investment will affect the IS curve.  
b) Excess demand for goods (to the left of the IS curve) leads to an increase 
in output. Increase in output will lead to increased demand for money. 
Increase in demand for money will lead to rise in interest rate and outward 
shift in the LM curve.   
We observe from the above that both real sector and monetary sector are inter-
related. A real shock to the economy will have effects on the monetary sector and 
vice versa.  
 
 
Fig. 3.5: Convergence to Equilibrium Point 
In Fig. 3.5 we plot the IS and LM curves. The economy is in equilibrium at point 
E, with 𝑖଴  to 𝑌଴  as equilibrium interest rate and output respectively. Suppose, due 
to certain shock to the economy, the equilibrium is disturbed. We have indicated 
the points F, G, H and K where the economy is not in equilibrium.  
Let us consider point G. As mentioned earlier, at point G, there is excess demand 
for money and excess supply of goods. The arrows given at point G specify the 
direction in which adjustment takes place. Due to excess demand for money, there 
will be a rise in the rate of interest. This is because people will sell bonds so as to 
hold more of liquid cash, as a result of which the bond prices will decline and rate 
of interest will increase. Upward pointing arrow in Fig. 3.5 represents rising 
interest rate. At point G, there is excess supply of goods also. This will lead to 
involuntary accumulation of goods; inventories will increase. As a result, firms 
will cut down production and the level of output will decline. The leftward pointing 
arrow represents the declining output. Finally, the economy will move towards 
equilibrium point E. 


--- Page 63 ---
 
 
 
63 
The Neoclassical 
Synthesis 
Points F, H and K in Fig. 3.5 also are disequilibrium points. You can analyse the 
supply and demand conditions at these points and find out the directions in which 
adjustment will take place. For example, at point ‘H’ there is excess supply of 
money (since it is to the left of the LM curve) and excess demand for goods (since 
it is to the left of the IS curve). Excess supply of money will lead to a decrease in 
interest rate. Excess demand for goods will lead to an increase in output level. 
Consequently, the economy will move towards the equilibrium point E.  
Suppose the economy is at point F (see Fig. 3.5) – here the monetary sector is in 
equilibrium, but the real sector is in disequilibrium. There is an excess supply of 
goods in the economy. This will lead to an increase in inventory accumulation. As 
a result, firms will decrease their production levels. Decrease in output will lead to 
a decrease in the demand for money and consequent decrease in the rate of interest. 
Finally, the economy will reach the equilibrium point E where both the IS and LM 
curves intersect.  
 
Fig. 3.6: Adjustment Process in the Economy 
Note that when one of the two markets is observing disequilibrium, the economy 
reaches back to equilibrium after the adjustment process. In Fig. 3.6 we have 
indicated the direction of change by arrow marks.  
3.4.3 Impact of Supply Shocks 
In the IS-LM model it is not necessary that the equilibrium occurs at the level of 
potential output of the economy (or, full employment output). Equilibrium could 
be at any level of output in the economy. An objective of policy makers has always 
been that the economy should operate at potential output level with unemployment 
at its natural level. In the long run does the economy maintain equilibrium at the 
full employment output level?  
In the long run prices do not remain constant. If actual output is above the potential 
out, there will be price rise. The aggregate expenditure of the economy (such as 
consumption, investment and government expenditure) describes the demand for 
goods and services, which refer to physical quantities of goods and services. A 
change in the price level may not affect these quantities. Thus, the IS curve is 
relatively stable – it may not shift. The LM curve, on the other hand, is based on 
the supply of and demand for real balances. Thus, a change in price level will shift 
the LM curve.  


--- Page 64 ---
 
 
 
64 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics 
The full employment output is given by the production capacity of the economy. 
It is derived from the production function (see Unit 1). Suppose the full 
employment output (potential output) of the economy is given by 𝑌∗. We depict it 
by a vertical straight line in Fig. 3.7. The IS 0 curve and LM 0 curve intersect at E 
which corresponds to the full employment output.  
 
Fig. 3.7: Adjustment to Adverse Supply Shocks 
Suppose the economy gets an adverse supply shock (for example, decline in 
agricultural productivity due to drought), as a result of which there is a decrease in 
the potential output of the economy from 𝑌∗ to 𝑌∗∗. As pointed out above, the IS 
curve is relatively stable in such situations and the economy adjusts through a shift 
in the LM curve. Due to the adverse supply shock, there is a rise in prices and 
consequent leftward shift in the LM curve. Thus, there is a rise in the rate of interest 
and the new equilibrium is at F.  
Check Your Progress 2 
1)  Explain how the LM curve is derived.  
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………… 
2)  Suppose the LM curve is vertical. What are its implications? 
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………… 
3)   In the IS-LM model, explain how adjustment to supply shocks takes place. 
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………… 


--- Page 65 ---
 
 
 
65 
The Neoclassical 
Synthesis 3.5 AD-AS MODEL  
In the IS-LM model we assumed that price level is constant. Let us relax that 
assumption and look into the impact of prices on equilibrium output in the 
economy. First, we derive the aggregate demand (AD) curve. Subsequently, we 
juxtapose the AD curve with the aggregate supply (AS) curve and find out the 
equilibrium level of output.  
3.5.1 Derivation of the AD Curve 
A change in the price level changes the real money supply (
ெ ೞ
௉ ) in the economy. 
This will result in a shift in the LM curve if money supply (M) is assumed to be 
constant. Thus, there will be a change in the equilibrium rate of interest and output. 
If we assume that the price level keeps changing over time, we will obtain a series 
of equilibrium levels of output corresponding to different price levels. If we plot 
such combinations of prices and output, we obtain the aggregate demand (AD) 
curve. 
The derivation of the AD curve from IS-LM curves is shown in Fig. 3.8. In panel 
(a) of Fig. 3.8 we juxtapose 𝐼𝑆଴  and 𝐿𝑀଴  curves intersecting at point E with an 
equilibrium income level of 𝑌଴  and interest rate 𝑖଴ . The 𝐿𝑀଴   curve is based on real 
money stock of 𝑀଴ /𝑃଴ . Thus, we describe the combination 𝑃଴  and 𝑌଴  as point ‘a’ 
on the AD curve in panel (b) of Fig.3.8.  
 
Fig. 3.8: Derivation of AD Curve 
Now, let us assume that price level declines to 𝑃ଵ  . If there is no change in money 
stock, supply of real balances increases to  𝑀଴ /𝑃ଵ . Note that the increase in real 
balances is due to decrease in prices, not due to an increase nominal money stock. 
The LM curve shifts to the right. In panel (a) of Fig. 3.8 we depict the new LM 
curve as 𝐿𝑀ଵ .  With 𝐼𝑆଴  and 𝐿𝑀ଵ , the new equilibrium point is ‘b’; the rate of 
interest falls to 𝑖ଵ  and income rises to 𝑌ଵ . The combination of 𝑃ଵ   and 𝑌ଵ  becomes 
point ‘b’ in Panel (b) of Fig. 3.7. By joining all such points as ‘a’ and ‘b’, we obtain 
the AD curve. 


--- Page 66 ---
 
 
 
66 
Traditional Approaches 
to Macroeconomics 
The AD curve is downward-sloping, which indicates an inverse relationship 
between prices and output. A decline in price level increases the real money 
supply, which creates disequilibrium in the money market. Increase in the supply 
of real balances lead to a decrease in interest rate. A decrease in the rate of interest 
restores equilibrium in the money market. A decrease in the rate of interest leads 
to an increase in the level of investment. An increase in the level of investment 
leads to an increase in aggregate expenditure, thereby increasing the level of 
output.  
The AD curve is flatter, if a given change in price leads to a larger change in output. 
On the other hand, the AD curve is steeper if a given change in price leads to a 
smaller increase in output. The AD curve shifts upward to the right as a result of 
expansionary fiscal policy (e.g., increase in government expenditure, reduction in 
tax rate). A contractionary fiscal policy, on the other hand, shifts the AD curve 
downward to the left. Similarly, an expansionary monetary policy (e.g., reduction 
in interest rate, increase in money supply through open market operations, reserve 
requirements, etc.) will shift the AD curve to the right while a contractionary 
monetary policy will shift the AD curve to the left.  
You should note that any factor that leads to a shift in the IS curve or the LM curve 
to the right will shift the AD curve to the right side. Similarly, any factor that shifts 
the IS curve or LM curve to the left will shift the AD curve to the left. Thus, an 
increase in any component of autonomous spending such as an increase in 
government spending leads to a rightward shift of the AD curve. Also, an increase 
in the nominal money supply will shift the AD curve upwards.  
3.5.2 Aggregate Supply (AS) Curve 
From microeconomics we know that the AS curve is upward-sloping – when price 
of a product increases, firms produce more of the product. In the case of the whole 
economy, production capacity is limited. Resources available to the economy are 
not unlimited. The behaviour of the AS curve is different in the long run compared 
to the short run. Short run, as you know, is a time period in which wages and certain 
other economic variables do not respond to changes in economic environment. In 
the long run is a time period in which wages and prices are flexible.  
Classical theory discussed in Unit 1 assumed that the AS curve is vertical at the 
full employment level. Thus, output is perfectly inelastic to changes in prices. 
Keynes went to the other extreme and assumed that the AS curve is horizontal. An 
implication of the horizontal AS curve is that firms can increase production to any 
level without affecting prices. Both the versions (vertical and horizontal) of the AS 
curve seems unrealistic. As you will learn in later units, the new-classical 
economists suggest that the AS curve is upward-sloping in the short run. Lucas’ in 
his ‘aggregate supply hypothesis’ advocate that economic agents respond to price 
and wage incentives, which influences their trade-off between leisure and work. 
As a result, when actual wage is higher than equilibrium wage rate, households 
supply more labour. Conversely, when actual wage rate is lower than equilibrium 
wage rate, household will decrease their supply of labour. As a result of this, the 
