--- Page 22 ---
 
 
192 
Financial Markets UNIT 11   CAPITAL MARKETS  
Structure 
11.0  Objectives 
11.1  Introduction 
11.2  Purpose and Uses of Capital Markets 
11.3  Debt and Equity as Means of Raising Finance 
11.4   Debt Market Instruments and their Pricing 
11.5   Equity: Markets and Volatility  
11.6  Indices of Share Prices 
11.7  Let Us Sum Up 
11.8   Key Words 
11.9  Some Useful Books 
11.10 Answers/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
11.0   OBJECTIVES 
 After going through this unit, you should be able to: 
 Describe the purposes for which capital markets exist and the role they 
play in a modern economy; 
 List the various participants and the types of exchanges taking place in 
these markets; 
 Compare between debt and equity as means of raising finance for 
business firms; 
 Analyse the working of debt markets, the instruments in these markets 
and the pricing in these markets; 
 Discuss the principles of the working of equity markets; and 
 Explain the concept of share price indices and the methods of their 
construction. 
11.1  INTRODUCTION 
The previous unit acquainted you with markets for short-term funds, and we 
learnt that these markets are called money markets. The present unit deals in 
detail with various markets for long-term funds. These are called capital 
markets. We will see there are primarily two types of capital markets: debt 
markets, and equity markets. In the next section, we consider the purpose of 
capital markets in general, and the various participants in these markets. In 
 


--- Page 23 ---
 
 
193 
Capital Markets the section after that, we will look at debt and equity as alternative means of 
raising finance. Section 11.4 limits itself to the debt market but provides a 
detailed discussion about the workings of these markets. The subsequent 
section turns to equity markets and explains why there is volatility, or risk, in 
these markets. Finally, section 11.6 discusses the indices of share prices and 
how these are constructed. Let us begin by stating the purpose and 
pinpointing the uses of capital markets. 
11.2 PURPOSE AND USES OF CAPITAL 
MARKETS   
Investment is nothing but postponed consumption. So, there are investors 
who are willing to lock in their funds in the expectation of earning higher 
returns and making capital gains. On the other side, there are business firms, 
organisations, and individuals who need funds and finance for making 
physical investments in the hope of making profits or gains, or even for 
consumption. Capital markets constitute a mechanism for bringing together 
buyers and sellers of various types of financial assets.  Exchanges of these 
financial assets determine their prices.  
As we have discussed in previous units the financial system of a nation 
consists of financial institutions, financial markets, and financial instruments 
and services. A financial market is an arrangement that facilitates the 
exchange of financial assets, including deposits and loans, corporate stocks 
and bonds, government bonds, and derivatives like futures and options. You 
will read about derivatives in the next unit. Financial markets can be 
classified in several ways: as primary and secondary markets, that is markets 
in new issues and markets in existing issues; as organised or formal markets, 
and as unorganised or informal markets. Financial markets can also be 
classified as money markets, markets for short-term funds, and capital 
markets, or markets for long-run funds. 
Capital markets can be markets where long-term debt contracts are traded, 
like bond markets or debentures, or these can be equity markets where 
financial claims are sold which allows the holder a share in the profits of the 
firms issuing these shares. The markets where shares are issued initially are 
called primary markets, and the markets where the holders of these shares 
further trade these in the expectation of making capital gains are called 
secondary markets.  
Let us look now at the basis for the need and provision of finance, as this will 
enable us to know about debt as the foundation of finance, and see who the 
participants in the markets are. Capital markets are all about the raising of 
capital and matching those who want capital (borrowers) with those who 
have capital (lenders). One way of matching these are financial institutions 
like banks and other depository institutions. For more complex transactions, 
markets are needed in which borrowers (and their agents) can meet lenders 
(and their agents). Commitments to borrow and lend are created. There are 


--- Page 24 ---
 
 
194 
Financial Markets also markets where these commitments to borrow and lend are themselves 
sold off to other people. For example, companies can raise money by selling 
shares to investors and existing shares can be freely bought and sold.  
Who are the borrowers? Individuals can borrow for domestic purchases or 
longer term such as financing and mortgages of houses, consumer durables, 
or education... companies need short-term funds to finance their cash flow. 
They need longer-term funds for growth and expansion. Governments are 
huge borrowers. They often borrow by issuing securities like bonds. Their 
total borrowing is called National Debt. Public sector companies may also 
borrow for expansion and growth. Borrowing may also be done from foreign 
agencies, institutions etc. Similarly, lenders may be individuals, financial 
institutions, or even companies. A company can use some of its idle funds to 
lend for short periods to make gains, in the money market. 
When money is lent, in many cases the borrower issues a receipt for the 
money, a promise to pay back. These receipts are called securities, and the 
lender has claims on these securities. Thus, securities are financial claims. 
The holders of financial securities are the lenders, and the issuers of financial 
securities are the borrowers. There are many types of securities like Treasury 
Bills, Certificates of Deposits, Commercial Paper, bonds, debentures, equity 
shares, and so on. All securities show key information about how much is 
owed, when it will be paid back, and how much is the rate of interest. 
So, we have seen that markets exist for finance and the main participants are 
borrowers, lenders, their agents and other individuals and agencies that 
facilitate exchanges. Borrowers issue securities. Lenders purchase these 
securities. For example, when the government issues a bond, we say that the 
government is selling the bonds. When you purchase the bond, you are 
lending money to the government, and the government is borrowing money 
from you. The market for long-term securities is called a capital market. 
Capital markets perform several important functions in a market economy. 
The capital markets make information processing and dissemination easier, 
which allows better decisions can be taken regarding investment, selling of 
assets, and so on. Capital markets allow quick valuation of financial 
instruments – both debt and equity. Capital markets also enable operational 
efficiency by simplifying transaction procedures and lowering search costs 
and transaction costs. Capital markets help to develop integration among 
several sectors of the economy such as between real and financial sectors, 
between debt and equity instruments, between short-term and long-term 
funds, and between domestic and external funds. Finally, capital markets 
facilitate the flow of funds into efficient channels through proper investment. 
11.3 DEBT AND EQUITY AS MEANS OF RAISING 
FINANCE 
In this section, we will take a look at one particular borrower: the business 
firm. We shall see how firms make decisions about raising finance for their 


--- Page 25 ---
 
 
195 
Capital Markets short-term and long-term requirements. Firms can raise finance either by 
borrowing (debt) or by issuing shares. So when we are talking about shares, 
we have only the primary market in mind. We are looking from a firm’s point 
of view and asking how much of the finance should be raised by incurring 
debt, and how much should be raised through the issue of shares. Is there 
some theory or some principles that will help the firm to make a decision? 
This is what we are discussing now. 
A firm has several assets that it invests in, and these investments generate a 
stream of cash flows.  If the firm is entirely equity financed, these cash flows 
belong only to the shareholders. On the other hand, the firm can offer shares 
but also go in for borrowings. This will offer the lenders some risk-free 
investment opportunities. How much of the capital the firm should raise 
through debt and how much through equity is a decision that is important for 
the firm. This is called the capital structure of the firm. To understand the 
decision regarding the capital structure of the firm, we will first look at some 
indicators of the firm’s financial position, particularly some financial ratios. 
One can look at the balance sheet and the income statements. Balance sheets 
look at the situation with assets and liabilities at a particular point of time 
while the income statement is a view of the earnings and expenditure that 
takes place over a specified period, usually a year. We can also look at a 
firm’s generation of cash. But what we propose to do now is to look at some 
important financial ratios regarding a firm's financial activity and 
performance. Ratio analysis forms a powerful tool for assessing the financial 
condition of the firm and enables us to relate disparate financial data with 
each other. Ratio analysis of this sort will enable us to understand the capital 
structure of the business firm. 
Different people and groups have varying stakes in the firm, and they will 
have different concerns over a firm’s performance. Stockholders and 
bondholders will be concerned about the long-term profitability of the firm, 
while creditors will look to see whether the firm can meet its payments on 
time. The firm’s management is concerned with both the long run and short 
run as well as day-to-day performance. There are several types of ratios that 
we shall be considering now. All of these can be grouped into four types: 
liquidity ratios, which measure the ability and adequacy of the current assets 
to meet current liabilities as they come due; activity ratios , which indicate 
the efficiency with which the firm uses its resources; financial leverage 
ratios, which measure how effective the firm is in managing its debt; and 
finally, profitability ratios , which measure how effective the firm is in 
generating net revenues and income about sales, costs, assets and shareholder 
equity. 
Let us begin with liquidity ratios. Liquidity ratios refer to a firm’s ability to 
meet its short-term obligations and are concerned with the size and 
composition of the firm’s working capital position. A higher working capital 
position implies more liquidity. An important ratio is the current ratio,  
which equals current assets divided by current liabilities. This ratio indicates 


--- Page 26 ---
 
 
196 
Financial Markets the amount of current assets available to meet all its obligations under current 
liabilities. The current ratio includes inventories, but since inventories are 
among the least liquid of a company’s assets, it is sometimes useful to 
exclude them. Deducting inventories from the current ratio gives us the quick 
or acid-test ratio: 
Quick ratio =  (Current assets –  Inventories)
Current Liabilities
 
Next, we turn to some activity ratios.  These by and large have to do with 
sales generated, often about the amount invested in them. One such measure 
is the accounts receivable turnover, which equals net credit sales divided by 
turnover. A related measure is the average collection period, which is given 
by (365) (receivables)/ (net credit sales). We can look at the total asset 
turnover which is an overarching activity ratio and is defined as:  
Total asset turnover = Net sales
total assets 
Now let us focus on some financial leverage ratios, which will enable us to 
talk about the capital structure of firms. Sometimes, as in Britain, leverage is 
called ‘gearing’. Leverage ratios reflect a firm’s risk position by analysing its 
financing mix. The idea is that the more the operations of the firm are 
financed through debt, the greater the risk. Information on this can be 
obtained from the firm’s balance sheet. The other way is to use income 
statement data to derive the coverage ratios, which measure the company’s 
ability to service that debt. Two widely used ratios derived from the 
information in balance sheets are the debt ratio and the debt-equity ratio. By 
debt, here we mean the firm’s current liabilities as well as long-run debt. The 
debt ratio is defined as: 
Debt ratio = Total Liabilities divided by Total Assets 
The debt-equity ratio is defined as: 
Debt-equity ratio = Total Liabilities divided by Equities 
Now since total assets equal total liabilities plus equity, it can be shown (it is 
left to you as an exercise) that: 
Debt-equity ratio = Debt ratio divided by (1 – Debt Ratio) 
From the income statements we can derive the firm's cash flow coverage, 
which is given as  
𝐂𝐚𝐬𝐡 𝐅𝐥𝐨𝐰 𝐂𝐨𝐯𝐞𝐫𝐚𝐠𝐞 
= EBIT + Lease/rental Payments + Depreciation
𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑡 +  𝐿𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑒 /𝑅𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑃𝑎𝑦𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 +  𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑝𝑎𝑙  𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑎𝑦𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡/ (1 − 𝑇)
 


--- Page 27 ---
 
 
197 
Capital Markets Where EBIT stands for annual earnings before interest and taxes, and T 
stands for taxes on a firm. 
Finally, we discuss profitability ratios. These ratios allow the shareholders to 
evaluate management’s performance. There are two types of profitability 
ratios used: profit margin on sales and returns on assets employed. Profit 
margins — a type of profitability ratio that looks at a firm’s expenditure on 
sales. There are two important such ratios: gross profit margin and net profit 
margin. They are defined as follows: 
𝐆𝐫𝐨𝐬𝐬 𝐏𝐫𝐨𝐟𝐢𝐭 𝐌𝐚𝐫𝐠𝐢𝐧 =  Gross Profits 
Net Sales  
𝐍𝐞𝐭 𝐏𝐫𝐨𝐟𝐢𝐭 𝐌𝐚𝐫𝐠𝐢𝐧 =  Net Income 
Net Sales  
In addition, we can work out the operating profit margin which is defined 
as: 
𝐎𝐩𝐞𝐫𝐚𝐭𝐢𝐧𝐠 𝐩𝐫𝐨𝐟𝐢𝐭 𝐦𝐚𝐫𝐠𝐢𝐧 =  EBIT
Net Sales 
In addition to looking at ratios related to the profit margin, we can relate 
returns to assets and shareholders’ equity. Two ratios frequently used are  
(ROA), also known as return on investment (ROI) , and return on equity 
(ROE). They are defined as: 
Return on Assets =  Net Income 
Total Assets 
Return on Equity = Net Income 
Shareholders’ Equity 
Equipped with these ratios, in the next section, we shall discuss, somewhat 
briefly, some elements of the capital structure of a firm.  
Check Your Progress 1 
1) What are the main functions performed by capital markets in the 
economy? 
.....................................................................................................................
.....................................................................................................................
.....................................................................................................................
.....................................................................................................................
..................................................................................................................... 
2)  Name and define two liquidity ratios and two financial leverage ratios. 
.....................................................................................................................
.....................................................................................................................


--- Page 28 ---
 
 
198 
Financial Markets .....................................................................................................................
..................................................................................................................... 
11.4 DEBT MARKET INSTRUMENTS AND THEIR 
PRICING 
The main debt instruments are bonds, which are fixed-income securities. The 
investor (who is the lender) gets periodic interest payments over the life of 
the bond and the principal payment at the time of redemption of the bond. 
The issuer of the bond (who is the lender, that is who undertakes to bear the 
debt) promises to pay the holder (buyer) of the bond this periodic stream of 
payments and the principal at the end. Debentures are like bonds, except that 
there is a clause that enables the investor to convert the debenture into equity 
shares on certain pre-specified terms and conditions. 
There are short-term debt instruments, which you studied in detail in the 
previous unit on money markets, like treasury bills, certificates of deposits, 
commercial paper etc. In this unit, we limit ourselves to a study of bonds. 
Bonds are issued by the government and these are government-guaranteed. 
For example, in India, the Government of India is the largest borrower. The 
government sells short-term to medium-term bonds issued by the Reserve 
Bank of India. State governments also sell bonds. Apart from the central and 
state governments, several government agencies issue bonds that are 
guaranteed by the government. Other than government bonds, there are bonds 
issued by public-sector companies, financial institutions, and private-sector 
companies. 
Over the last couple of decades, there have been several innovations in the 
types of bonds that have been issued.  Traditionally simple bonds have been 
issued (these are known as ‘plain vanilla bonds’ or straight bonds). These 
bonds usually pay a fixed periodic coupon over its life and return the 
principal on the maturity date. The new types of bonds are of several types: 
zero-coupon bonds; floating rate bonds; bonds with embedded options; and 
commodity-linked bonds. These are explained below: 
Zero coupon bonds do not give regular interest payments. It is issued at a 
large discount and redeemed at face value on maturity. Sometimes, these 
bonds carry the call and put options. You will know about put and call 
options in the next unit. Floating rate bonds, unlike straight bonds that pay a 
fixed rate of interest, pay an interest rate that is linked to a benchmark rate 
such as the interest rate on Treasury bills. Bonds with embedded options 
include bonds like debentures that give the bondholder the right to convert 
them into equity shares; as well as callable bonds, which are bonds that give 
the issuer the right to redeem them prematurely on certain terms; and bonds 
with put options, which are bonds that give the investor the right to 
prematurely sell them back to the issuer on certain terms. Finally, there are 
commodity-linked bonds that are bonds the return from which depends on the 
price of certain specified commodities. 


--- Page 29 ---
 
 
199 
Capital Markets We will be looking at the risks associated with bonds in detail in unit 13 of 
Block 4. For the present, we proceed from the assumption that bonds are risk-
free. With that assumption, let us now discuss the value of a bond and see 
how the value of a bond is determined. The value of a bond is equal to the 
present value of the expected cash flows arising from it. Here you will do 
well to go over unit 4 in Block 1. Hence we need to look at the expected 
stream of cash flows and an estimate of the returns. We assume further that 
the bond pays a fixed coupon interest rate, that coupon payments are made 
annually and that the bonds will be redeemed at par when it matures. 
With these assumptions, the value for such a bond is: 
 
1 (1 ) (1 )
T
t T
t
X MA r r
     
where A = value (in rupees) 
           T = number of years 
           X = annual coupon payment (in rupees) 
          The required return is denoted by r 
          M = maturity value 
          The period when the payment is received is denoted by t. 
A basic property of a bond is that there is an inverse relationship between the 
price of the bond and yield. This is because as the yield increases, the present 
value of the cash flow decreases; therefore the price falls. What is the 
relationship between the bond price and time? Since the bond price must 
equal its par value at maturity (we assume there is no risk of default) bond 
prices change with time. If the current price prevails when the redemption is 
higher than the par value of the bond, the bond is said to be a premium bond; 
if the current price at the time of redemption is lower, the bond is said to be a 
discount bond. 
The trading of bonds is usually based on their prices. But since there are 
significant differences in cash flow patterns, and also other features, of 
different bonds, different bonds are not usually compared in terms of their 
prices. Instead, the point of comparison is bond yields. We now turn to some 
measures of bond yields. A common measure of yield is the current yield , 
which relates the annual coupon interest to the market price. It is expressed 
as: 
Current Yield = Annual Interest / Price. 
The current yield does not consider the capital gain (or loss) that the investor 
will face if she holds the bond till maturity and sells at a premium (or 
discount). This measure also neglects the time value of money. The next 
measure of yield that we consider is the yield to maturity . This is the value 


--- Page 30 ---
 
 
200 
Financial Markets of the rate of interest that makes the present value of the cash stream received 
from owning the bond equal to the price of the bond. It can be expressed as 
 
1 (1 ) (1 )
T
t T
t
X MP r r
     
Where P is the price of the bond, and the other letters denote the same 
variable as in the previous equation. Sometimes the calculation of r in the 
above is difficult and a trial-and-error procedure is resorted to. The final 
measure of yield that we consider is the yield to call . It is calculated in the 
same way as yield to maturity, except that in yield to call, instead of maturity 
value at the end, there is call price and the duration, instead of going from 
say, 1 to T, goes from 1 to the number of years until the assumed call date.     
Check Your Progress 2 
1) What is yield to maturity? 
.....................................................................................................................
.....................................................................................................................
..................................................................................................................... 
2) How do we calculate the expected stream of cash flows arising from 
bonds? 
.....................................................................................................................
.....................................................................................................................
..................................................................................................................... 
11.5 EQUITY: MARKETS AND VOLATILITY  
Before we go on to discuss equity markets, let us discuss the role that equity 
markets play in the economy. We shall use the terms stock market and stock 
exchange interchangeably. What does a stock exchange do? It provides the 
regulation of company listings, a price formation mechanism, the supervision 
of trading, authorisation of members, settlement of transactions and 
publication of trade data and prices.  
Equity markets consist of primary markets and secondary markets. The 
primary market is the market for new issues of shares, where shares are 
initially offered to the public. The secondary market, on the other hand, is the 
market for already-issued financial assets. The main difference between the 
two markets is that in the secondary market, the issuer of the share does not 
receive funds from the buyer. Rather, the existing issue changes hands in the 
secondary market, and funds flow from the new buyer of the share to the 
original buyer.  
Equity capital is ownership capital. It is the shareholders who collectively 
own the company. They undertake the risks but also earn the rewards of 


--- Page 31 ---
 
 
201 
Capital Markets ownership. The amount of capital that a company can issue is the authorised 
capital. The amount of capital that a company offers to investors is the 
issued capital.  The part of capital subscribed by investors is called the paid-
up capital assuming that no calls are outstanding i.e., all the shareholders 
have paid their called-up money. The par value is the face value of the share. 
Face value is the equity share capital divided by the number of equity shares. 
When the issue price is greater than the par value, the difference is called the 
equity premium . The book value  (sometimes called the intrinsic value) of 
an equity share is equal to: 
(paid-up capital + reserves and surplus ) /( number of equity shares 
outstanding). Alternatively, the book value can be found out by dividing the 
net assets (assets minus liabilities)  by the number of equity shares 
outstanding.  The market value of an equity share is the price at which it is 
traded in the market. 
We now turn to some valuation ratios. Valuation ratios indicate how 
investors assess the stock in the equity markets. These are thus indicators of 
the performance of the issuing firm. The important valuation ratios are the 
price-earnings ratio, the yield, and the ratio of market value to book value. 
Price-earnings ratio: It is defined as the market price per share divided by 
earnings per share. The earnings per share ratio is just the after-tax profit less 
preference dividend divided by the number of outstanding equity shares. In 
practice, this ratio is popular with the terminology PE ratio. Higher PE ratio 
shows higher earning to an equity share which may increase demand of the 
share.   
The price-earnings ratio reflects risk characteristics, investor sentiments, the 
degree of liquidity, and growth prospects. 
Yield: This measures the rate of return earned by shareholders. It is defined 
as: 
Yield = Dividend +  price change
Initial price
 
We can break this into two parts: 
 Dividend 
Initial price + price change 
Initial price  
The first term denotes the dividend yield, while the second term is the capital 
gains or losses yield. Usually, companies with low growth prospects offer a 
high dividend yield while the capital gains yield is low. It is the converse 
about companies with high growth prospects. 
Market Value to Book Value ratio:  This is defined as the ratio of market 
value per share to the book value per share. It is a measure of the firm’s 
generation of wealth. If it is more than 1, that is, if the market value exceeds 
