--- Page 11 ---
 
 
181 
Money Markets liquidity safety and attractive returns, it is a favourable instrument 
for investors. 
iii) Other sub-markets   
a) Certificate of deposits (CDs):  Banks can raise short-term cash by 
issuing certificates of deposit. It pays the holder higher interest 
rates the longer the cash is held. The CD is a document to the title 
of time deposit but is distinguished from conventional time deposit 
in respect of its free negotiability. The CD was introduced in the 
Indian money market in March 1989. The guidelines for their issue 
have changed over the years in consonance with the development 
of the money market.  
Its term generally ranges from three months to five years and 
restricts the holders to withdraw funds on demand. However, on 
payment of certain penalty the money can be withdrawn on 
demand.  
They are freely transferable by endorsement and delivery but only 
after 45 days of the date of issue. CDs are issued at a discount 
calculated front end or rear end. The discount rate is market-
determined. Initially, only Commercial banks were authorized to 
issue CDs. In 2021, RBI decided to permit RRBs to issue CDs. It is 
an important source for mobilizing bulk funds by banks  at low 
operational costs. The returns on Certificate of Deposits are higher 
than T-Bills because it assumes higher level of risk. While buying 
Certificate of Deposit, return method should be seen. Returns can 
be based on Annual Percentage Yield (APY) or Annual Percentage 
Rate (APR). In APY, interest earned is based on compounded 
interest calculation. However, in APR method, simple interest 
calculation is done to generate the return. Accordingly, if the 
interest is paid annually, equal return is generated by both APY and 
APR methods. However, if interest is paid more than once in a 
year, it is beneficial to opt APY over APR.  
b) Commercial papers (CPs) : Large companies with impeccable 
credit can simply issue short-term unsecured promissory notes to 
raise cash. CP is a usance promissory note issued by a corporate 
entity at a discount with a fixed maturity evidencing the short-term 
obligation of the issuer. CP was introduced in the Indian money 
market in 1989. The issue of CP seeks to bypass the intermediation 
process of the banks. It is a low-cost alternative to bank loans. It is 
a short term unsecured promissory note issued by corporates and 
financial institutions at a discounted value on face value. They are 
usually issued with fixed maturity between one to 270 days and for 
financing of accounts receivables, inventories and meeting short 
term liabilities. Say, for example, a company has receivables of  
Rs. 1 crore with credit period of 6 months. It will not be able to 


--- Page 12 ---
 
 
182 
Financial Markets liquidate its receivables before 6 months. The company is in need 
of funds. It can issue commercial papers in form of unsecured 
promissory notes at discount of 10% on face value of Rs. 1 crore 
maturing after 6 months. The company has strong credit rating and 
easily finds buyers. The company is able to liquidate its receivables 
immediately and the buyer is able to earn interest of Rs. 5 lakhs 
over a period of 6 months. They yield higher returns as compared 
to T-Bills as they are less secure in comparison to these bills. 
Chances of default are almost negligible but are not zero risk 
instruments. Commercial Paper being an instrument not backed by 
any collateral, only firms with high quality credit ratings will find 
buyers easily without offering any substantial discounts. They are 
issued by corporates to impart flexibility in raising working capital 
resources at market determined rates. Commercial Papers are 
actively traded in the secondary market since they are issued in the 
form of promissory notes and are freely transferable in demat form. 
 c) Banker acceptance  is also a money market instrument to meet 
short-term liquidity requirements. The company provides a bank 
guarantee to the seller to pay the amount of goods purchased at the 
agreed future date. In case the buyer fails to pay on the agreed date, 
the seller can invoke a bank guarantee. It is usually used to finance 
exports and imports. 
d) Repurchase options (Repo) or ready forward (RF) : Repo 
transactions have gained tremendous importance due to their short 
tenure and flexibility to suit both lender and borrower. Under this 
transaction, the borrower places with the lender certain acceptable 
security against funds received and agrees to reverse this 
transaction on a predetermined future date at the agreed interest 
cost.  No fixed period has been prescribed for this transaction  
however; generally, repo transactions are for a minimum period of 
14 days and a maximum period of 1 year. The interest is market-
determined and built into the structure of the Repo transaction . 
Repo transactions can be undertaken by commercial banks, 
financial institutions, brokers DFHI. Repo transactions are 
structured to suit the requirements of both borrower and lender and 
have, therefore, become an extremely popular mode of 
raising/investing short-term funds. The borrower has the advantage 
of raising funds against its securities without altering its asset mix 
while the lender finds a safe avenue giving an attractive return. 
Moreover, the fund’s management for both borrower and lender is 
improved as the date of reversal of the transaction is known in 
advance.   
These instruments together have made the Indian money market a vibrant 
one.   


--- Page 13 ---
 
 
183 
Money Markets 10.5.3  The Unorganized Money Market 
The unorganized market  is comprised of indigenous financial institutions 
like indigenous bankers, lenders, nidhis and chit funds. They lend money to 
the public and also collect deposits from the public. There are also private 
finance companies, chit funds etc., whose activities are not controlled by the 
RBI. In 1991, the RBI has taken steps to bring private finance companies and 
chit funds under its strict control by issuing non-banking financial companies 
(Reserve Bank Directions, 1998). However, the regulations concerning their 
financial dealings are still inadequate and their financial instruments have not 
been standardised. The following are some of the constituents of the 
unorganised money market in India. 
i)  Indigenous Bankers : Indigenous bankers include those individuals and 
private firms which are engaged in receiving deposits and giving loans 
thereby acting like a mini bank. Their activities are not at all regulated. 
With the growth of commercial banks and cooperative banks, the area of 
operations of indigenous bankers has contracted. These days a few 
thousand indigenous bankers are operating in the western and southern 
parts of the country and engaging themselves in the traditional banking 
business. Indigenous bankers are classified into four main subgroups, i.e., 
Gujarati Shroffs, Multani-or Shikarpuri Shroffs, Chettiars and Marwari, 
and Kayast. Gujarati Shroffs  are mostly operating in Mumbai, Kolkata 
and industrial and trading cities of Gujarat. The Multani or Shikarpuri 
Shroffs are operating mainly in Mumbai and Chennai. The Chettiars are 
mostly found in the South. The Marwari Shroffs  are mostly active in 
Mumbai, Kolkata, the tea gardens of Assam and also in different other 
parts of North-East India. Among the four aforementioned groups, the 
Gujarati indigenous bankers are considered the most powerful groups in 
respect of their volume of business. 
The indigenous bankers are mostly engaged in both banking and non-
banking business which they do not want to separate. Their lending 
operations remain mostly unregulated and unsupervised. They charge a 
high rate of interest and they are not influenced by the bank rate policy of 
the RBI. 
ii) Unregulated Non-Bank Financial Intermediaries : There are different 
types of unregulated non-bank financial intermediaries in India. They are 
mostly constituted by loan or finance companies, chit funds and ‘nidhis’. 
A good number of finance companies in India are engaged in collecting 
substantial amounts of funds in the form of deposits, borrowings and 
other receipts. They normally give loans to wholesale traders, retailers, 
artisans, and different self-employed persons at a high rate of interest 
ranging between 36 to 48 per cent.   
There are various types of chit funds in India. They are doing business in 
almost all the states but the major portion of their business is 
concentrated in Tamil Nadu and Kerala. Moreover, there are ‘ nidhis’ 


--- Page 14 ---
 
 
184 
Financial Markets operating in South India which are a kind of mutual benefit fund 
restricted to its members. 
iii) Moneylenders : Moneylenders are advancing loans to small borrowers 
like marginal and small farmers, agricultural labourers, artisans, factory 
and mine workers, low-paid staff, small traders etc. at very high rates of 
interest and also adopt various malpractices for manipulating loan 
records of these poor borrowers. There are broadly three types of 
moneylenders: 
i)  Professional moneylenders dealing solely with money lending; 
ii)  Itinerant moneylenders such as Kabulis and Pathans, and 
iii)  Non-professional moneylenders. 
The area of operation of the moneylenders is very much localised and their 
methods of operation are also not uniform. The money lending operation of 
the moneylenders is unregulated and unsupervised which leads to the worst 
exploitation of the small borrowers. Moneylenders have become a necessary 
evil in the absence of sufficient institutional sources of credit for the poorer 
sections of society. Although various measures have been introduced to 
control the activities of moneylenders due to a lack of political will, these are 
not enforced, leading to the exploitation of small borrowers. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) List the main constituents of the Indian Money Market.  
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
2) Distinguish between Certificate of deposits (CDs) and commercial 
papers (CPs). 
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
3) Distinguish between Indigenous Bankers and Moneylenders.  
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
4) Explain the importance of treasury bills.  
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 


--- Page 15 ---
 
 
185 
Money Markets 10.6  REGULATORY MEASURES TO 
STREAMLINE THE WORKING OF THE 
MONEY MARKET 
In India, money markets are regulated by both RBI and SEBI. The Indian 
money market has undergone metamorphosis during the last two decades 
owing to a series of measures which increased the number of participants, 
introduced newer instruments and deregulated the interest rates. RBI 
undertook several policy measures for setting up institutions to accelerate the 
growth and development of the Indian money market. The growth of the 
Indian money market is gaining momentum and is getting interrelated with 
other markets.  
Three important committees were set up. While the Chakravarty Committee 
(1985) recommended measures for improvement in the monetary system, the 
Vaghul Working Group  (1986) recommended measures to activate and 
vitalize the money market and the Narasimham Committee  (1991) 
recommended measures to streamline the functioning of the financial system.  
Notwithstanding the above, it was only after the initiation of the reform 
measures that the money market gained vibrancy, although not to a very high 
degree. However, a significant aspect of the reform measures has been that 
the financial system as a whole, has become more inter-related and today the 
impact of the volatility in one market is felt in the other market.  Keeping in 
mind the need for a developed money market for a fast-growing economy 
like India, RBI undertook several policy measures for setting up institutions 
to help hasten the growth and development of the Indian money market. 
Accordingly: 
i) The Discount and Finance House of India (DFHI)  was established in 
1988 to broaden and deepen the money market operations. It acts as a 
market maker;  
ii) The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) was set up in 1992 to 
function as the apex regulatory body relating to all aspects of security 
market activities;  
iii) Credit Rating agencies such as CRISIL (1987), ICRA (1991), etc. were 
promoted to make possible easy raising of funds from the money market. 
Considering the need for making available an adequate number of and 
different variety of financial instruments as a precursor for a developed 
money market, several instruments were introduced in the Indian money 
market. Several innovative submarkets such as certificates of deposit, call 
money market, collateral loan market, commercial paper market; MFS, etc. 
come to be introduced to strengthen the money market .  A striking feature of 
the money market instruments is that the interest rate structure applicable to 
them has been deregulated with effect from May 1, 1989. Accordingly, the 
rates of interest will be market-determined. The various money market 
instruments that are mentioned above have some of the following 


--- Page 16 ---
 
 
186 
Financial Markets characteristics:  short maturity, high liquidity, high safety, and high volume. 
An essential feature of these instruments is that they are being dealt with by 
established agencies such as RBI, DFHI and Securities Trading Corporation 
of India (STCI) at the apex level and by commercial banks, public financial 
institutions and selected corporate entities at the operating level. Whereas 
commercial banks can indulge in both buying and selling of these instruments 
without any restriction, only lending facilities with the fulfilment of certain 
conditions are available for selected public financial institutions and corporate 
entities. 
Credit control measures such as CRR and SLR are efficiently manipulated to 
tone up and buoy the money market operations, especially in the commercial 
banking sector . The reintroduction of repos (ready forward ) in November 
1996, was aimed at mopping up excess liquidity thus reducing volatility in 
call money markets and on foreign exchange markets. Beginning October 21, 
1997, the repo facility was further extended to corporate debt and PSU bonds. 
Under this arrangement, RBI made reverse repo facility  available to primary 
dealers in the government securities market, at the bank rate, on a 
discretionary basis and subject to certain regulations from time to time. 
The Indian money market also has attained greater vibrancy over the years. 
Since the initiation of the liberalisation measures in mid-1991, there has 
emerged a stronger relationship between the money markets and the other 
markets viz., the foreign exchange market, capital market and the central 
government securities market, in the financial system. For all this to happen, 
the necessary policy changes carried out through the credit policies of the 
RBI have played a very significant role. 
Money market rates play a main role in controlling the inflation. Higher rates 
in the money markets decrease the liquidity in the economy and have the 
effect of reducing the economic activity in the system. Reduced rates on the 
other hand increase the liquidity in the market and bring down the cost of 
capital considerably, thereby raising the investment. This function also assists 
the RBI in controlling the general money supply in the economy. To further 
strengthen the regulatory architecture while promoting greater efficiency in 
the financial markets, the Reserve Bank initiated policy measures to address 
certain regulatory gaps, promote transparency and improve liquidity in the 
money markets.  
10.7 LIMITATIONS OF INDIAN MONEY 
MARKET 
In terms of both organisation and development, the Indian money market is 
not comparable to any of the developed money markets of the world. It also 
cannot match the extent of resources, stability and elasticity of these 
developed money markets. But among the third-world countries, India has 
been maintaining the most developed banking system. Even then the 
organisation of the money market suffers from several drawbacks. 


--- Page 17 ---
 
 
187 
Money Markets There is no adequate and continuous supply of short-term assets such as 
treasury bills, bills of exchange, short-term Government bonds etc. 
Accordingly, there are no dealers of short-term assets who act as 
intermediaries between the Government and the entire banking system. 
Despite the serious efforts made by the Reserve Bank of India, the bill market 
in India has not yet been fully developed. The market suffers from a lack of 
coordination between its different constituents and fails to attract foreign 
funds. Because of the existing dichotomy between organised and unorganised 
sectors, it is difficult for the RBI to ensure uniform and effective 
implementations of monetary policy in both sectors. Wasteful competition 
exists not only between the organised and unorganised sectors but also 
among the members of the two sectors. As compared to the size and 
population of the country, the banking institutions are not enough. Inadequate 
banking facilities in vast rural areas still exist. Disparities in the interest rates 
adversely affect the smooth and effective functioning of the money market. 
In recent years, serious efforts have been made by the Government and the 
RBI to remove the shortcomings of the Indian money market. Moreover, with 
the setting up of DFHI and MMMFs, the lot of Indian money market has 
achieved considerable progress in recent times and is also expected to 
achieve further progress in the years to come. 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) For what purposes three committees were set up? 
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
2) What reforms were introduced by RBI to strengthen the money market in 
India?   
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
3) Highlight the limitations of the Indian Money Market. 
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
10.8 LET US SUM UP     
The money market is an organized exchange market where participants can 
lend and borrow short-term, high-quality debt securities with average 
maturities of one year or less. The market enables governments, banks, and 
other large institutions to sell short-term securities to fund their short-


--- Page 18 ---
 
 
188 
Financial Markets term cash flow needs. It also allows individual investors to invest small 
amounts of money in a low-risk market. The short period of maturity is the 
hallmark of the money market instruments, while the markets that cater to the 
need for long-term funds are called Capital Markets. The nature of the money 
market depends to a large extent on the kind of economy it is expected to 
serve. 
The money market instruments are money at call and short notice (Call 
Loans). Treasury Bills (TBs), Bills Rediscounting Scheme (BRS), Certificates 
of Deposit (CDs), Commercial papers (CPs), Repurchase Options or Ready 
Forward (REPOs),  Options, Financial Futures, Forward Rate Agreements, 
Swaps, etc.   
The instruments of the money market are characterized by short duration, 
large volume and deregulated interest rates. The instruments are highly liquid. 
They also are safe investments owing to the issuer’s inherent financial 
strength.  
New instruments have evolved and more institutions have been allowed to 
participate and market makers have been created to impart depth to the 
market.  The money market in India consists of formal or organized money 
markets and informal or unorganized money markets.  
In a money market, the central bank of the country plays a pivotal role and 
occupies a strategic position. The central bank is the key constituent of the 
money market, being the residual source of supply of funds and this attaches 
great significance to its operations.   
The objective of monetary management by the central bank is to align money 
market rates with the key policy rate. As excessive money market volatility 
could deliver confusing signals about the stance of monetary policy, it is 
critical to ensure orderly market behaviour, from the point of view of both 
monetary and financial stability. Thus, the efficient functioning of the money 
market is important for the effectiveness of monetary policy.  
10.9 KEY WORDS 
Bill of Exchange          : A negotiable instrument with three parties to the 
agreement: the drawer of the order, the drawee, 
who is ordered to make payment, and the payee. 
For instance, a commercial bank cheque is a draft 
on the bank by the depositor payable to a 
designated payee. 
Credit Controls          : Regulatory restrictions on bank lending. 
Financial Integration : How financial markets are tied together 
geographically — domestically and internationally.  


--- Page 19 ---
 
 
189 
Money Markets Market Maker            :    Refers to the dealers who buy or sell securities 
from their inventories, thereby ensuring that there 
is always a market in which investors can buy or 
sell their securities. 
Monetary Policy         :    The management of the money supply and its 
links to prices, interest rates and other economic 
variables.  
Open Market              : 
Operations 
The purchase and sale of securities in financial 
markets by the central bank. 
Regional Rural           :  
Banks (RRBs) 
RRBs were established in 1975 under the 
provisions of the Regional Rural Banks Act. 1976 
to develop the rural economy. 
Statutory Liquidity    : 
Ratio (SLR) 
Refers to that portion of total deposits of a 
commercial bank which it has to keep in the form 
of government or government approved securities. 
Underwriters              : Underwriters are those intermediaries who take 
upon themselves the responsibility to subscribe to 
that portion of the securities issued by a company 
which remain un-subscribed by the investing 
public.  
10.10 SOME USEFUL BOOKS 
 Bhole, L M and Jitendra Mahakud (2017): ‘ Financial Institution and 
Markets’, 6th edition, Chapters 15 and 16, Tata McGraw-Hill Education 
Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi 
 Economic Survey Various Issues (Government of India). 
 Gupta, Suraj B. (2010): Monetary Economics; Institutions, Theory and 
Policy, S. Chand and Company, New Delhi (Chapters – 4, 18 & 19). 
 Khan, M Y (2017): ‘ Indian Financial System ’, 10 th edition, Chapter 9, 
Tata McGraw-Hill Education Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi  
 Mohanty, Deepak (2013): Money Market and Monetary Operations in 
India, RBI   Bulletin, January  
 Report of the Committee on Banking Sector Reforms (Chairman: M . 
Narsimham)1998 
 Report of the Working Group on Money Market (Chairman: N. Vaghul), 
1987 
 Reserve Bank of India (2011): Reserve Bank of India: Functions and 
Working, RBI,   Mumbai (Various issues) 
 Reserve Bank of India:  Report on Currency and Finance. Annual Report 
(Various issues) 


--- Page 20 ---
 
 
190 
Financial Markets 10.11 ANSWERS / HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES  
Check Your Progress 1 
1) Section of the financial market where financial instruments with high 
liquidity and short-term maturities that usually range from overnight to 
just under a year such as treasury bills and commercial papers. It is 
considered a safe place to invest due to the high liquidity of securities. 
2) Consists of negotiable instruments, provides an avenue for equilibrating 
the short-term surplus funds of lenders and the requirements of 
borrowers, collection of markets, such as, call money, notice money, 
repose, term money, treasury bills, commercial bills, certificate of 
deposits, commercial papers, inter-bank participation certificates, 
inter-corporate deposits, swaps futures, options, etc. volume of funds 
or financial assets traded in the money market is very large. 
3) Highly organised commercial banking and financial systems, Promote 
financial mobility, Continuous supply of negotiable securities, Existence 
of several sub-markets, integrated with the rest of the markets in the 
financial system. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) Organized money market, unorganised money markets. 
2) The CD is a document to the title of time deposit but is distinguished 
from conventional time deposit in respect of its free negotiability. Banks 
can raise short-term cash by issuing certificates of deposit. CP is a 
usance promissory note issued by a corporate entity at a discount with a 
fixed maturity evidencing the short-term obligation of the issuer. The 
issue of CP seeks to bypass the intermediation process of the banks.   
3) Indigenous bankers include those individuals and private firms which are 
engaged in receiving deposits and giving loans thereby acting like a mini 
bank. Moneylenders are advancing loans to small borrowers like 
marginal and small farmers, agricultural labourers, artisans, factory and 
mine workers, low-paid staff, small traders etc. at very high rates of 
interest. 
4) The Treasury bill  is a short-term government security having a maturity 
period ranging from a few days to a few months. There is no default risk 
associated with such instruments. They are approved assets for Statutory 
Liquidity Ratio (SLR). 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) Three important committees were set up. While the Chakravarty 
Committee (1985) recommended measures for improvement in the 
monetary system, the Vaghul Working Group  (1986) recommended 


--- Page 21 ---
 
 
191 
Money Markets measures to activate and vitalize the money market and the Narasimham 
Committee (1991) recommended measures to streamline the functioning 
of the financial system.   
2) The establishment of the Discount and Finance House of India 
(DFHI)(1988), the Securities and Exchange Board of India 
(SEBI)(1992), Credit Rating agencies such as CRISIL (1987), ICRA 
(1991). 
3) Inadequate and discontinuous supply of short-term assets such as 
treasury bills, bills of exchange, short-term Government bonds etc., no 
dealers of short-term assets who act as intermediaries between the 
Government and the entire banking system, lack of coordination between 
its different constituents, failure to attract foreign funds.  
10.12  TERMINAL QUESTIONS 
1)  Explain the constituents and salient features of the Indian money market.  
2)  Discuss various characteristics of a good money market. Can the Indian 
money market be termed a developed money market? Outline the 
measures to improve the functioning of the Indian money market. 
3)  What reform measures RBI has adopted to diversify and strengthen the 
various instruments of the money market? 
4)  Examine the role and importance of RBI in the functioning of the Indian 
money market.   
