--- Page 32 ---
 
 
202 
Financial Markets the book value, it means wealth has been generated.  We can see that if the 
ratio of market value to book value is equal to one, all three ratios, namely, 
earnings price ratio (reciprocal of price-earning ratio), yield and return to 
equity will be equal to each other. 
Nobel laureate James Tobin has proposed a valuation ratio, called Tobin’s q, 
after the letter he used to denote it. The q ratio is defined as: 
Market value of equities and liabilities
estimated replacement cost of assets
 
The q ratio looks a little like the market value to book value ratio. But there 
are two important differences: the numerator of the q ratio includes liabilities 
of the issuer of debt instruments along with the market value of equities, that 
is, it includes all wealth. Also, in the denominator of the q ratio, the assets are 
valued at their replacement cost, not book value.  
The main functions of the secondary markets are that it provides useful 
information both to the issuer as well as to investors, the function it serves for 
the issuer is as follows. The secondary market provides regular information, 
by the latest prices of shares, to the original issuer of the shares about the 
value of its shares. The periodic trading of the asset reveals to the issuer the 
price the share commands in the market at a certain time. Such information 
helps the issuer to evaluate how well they are using the funds from earlier 
primary market activities, and it also provides some idea about how receptive 
investors will be to new issues.  
To the original buyer of shares in the initial public offering in the primary 
market, the secondary market acts like an escape clause. If the shares do not 
seem to be doing as well as the original buyer thought, he or she can always 
sell them for cash. Of course, the investor can also sell it for cash to make 
capital gains. The secondary market provides the original buyer of the shares 
an opportunity to sell these for cash. If the investors are not confident that 
they can move from one financial asset to another, they might be reluctant to 
invest in any security. This will make it difficult for the issuers to issue new 
shares, and they will have to offer higher returns or dividends to attract 
investors. 
The secondary markets also perform a useful function. They provide 
information about the assets’ fair price, as well as liquidity from their assets 
should they want to sell the assets. Another very important function 
performed by secondary stock markets is that they reduce search costs, by 
making it easier for buyers and sellers of assets to find each other. The 
secondary markets also lower transaction costs.  
Let us now discuss some basic parameters that enable one to gauge the 
functioning of the stock market as a whole, which makes it easier to know if 
the stock market is developed and mature or not. The parameters that we 
should look at to judge the functioning of equity markets are volatility, 
liquidity, size of the market, and transaction cost. The volatility of a stock is 


--- Page 33 ---
 
 
203 
Capital Markets a measure of the frequency with which its price changes over some time. If 
the price changes frequently, it means that the stock is volatile. Investors tend 
to avoid shares with high volatility because of the risks involved. The 
volatility of stocks also influences the outside flow of funds and hence has a 
macroeconomic dimension. Proximate factors like speculation and trading 
and settlement systems, as well as other factors like government policies, 
interest rates, inflation, and the regulatory framework for equity markets all 
affect volatility in the stock market.  
Liquidity is a very important indicator of the proper functioning of stock 
markets. The situation about liquidity greatly influences stock market 
efficiency and development. A market is considered liquid when large 
volumes of trade can take place without a significant effect on stock prices. If 
an investor can transact at a price close to the current market price, the 
market is considered very liquid. There are two methods for measuring 
liquidity: the turnover ratio and the value traded ratio. The turnover ratio  
equals the ratio of the total value of domestic shares traded to total market 
capitalisation. This ratio seeks to measure the trading of domestic equities in 
domestic markets relative to the size of the market. The more the volume of 
sales, the higher the turnover. High turnover is often an indicator of low 
transaction costs. Even if a market is large, turnover may be low despite huge 
market capitalisation if the volume of trading is low, which can occur if the 
market is not very active. The other measure of liquidity is the value-traded 
ratio. This equals the ratio of the total value of domestic shares traded on the 
major stock exchanges to the GDP. It is a reflection of organised trading of 
shares as a proportion of GDP and is thus a macro-level indicator of liquidity 
in the capital markets. 
The third parameter regarding the functioning of equity markets is the size of 
the stock market, and a useful measure of this size is the market 
capitalisation ratio, which is the ratio of market capitalisation (the value of 
listed shares i.e., market price × number of the equity shares) to the GDP. It is 
economically very significant as it is based on the assumption that the size of 
the stock market is positively correlated with the ability to mobilise capital 
and diversify risk. Hence it is expected that in an economy with well-
developed stock markets, the market capitalisation ratio will be large. This 
ratio complements the value-traded ratio. The final indicator of the 
development, maturity and vibrancy of stock markets is the level of 
transaction costs. In the context of stock markets transaction costs would 
include explicit costs like brokerage costs, stamp duty, commission etc., as 
well as implicit costs like clearing and settlement costs, bad delivery, 
paperwork and so on. If transaction costs are low, investors will be induced to 
trade in greater volume, which in turn will raise the value traded ratio. 
11.6  INDICES OF SHARE PRICES 
The stock market index is a very important indicator of the performance of 
share prices. It takes a set of stocks as representative of the prices of shares in 


--- Page 34 ---
 
 
204 
Financial Markets the market, and by tracking the changes in this index, we can get an idea of 
the overall market sentiment. The stock market index is a pointer to market 
behaviour. The stock market index reflects market direction and indicates 
day-to-day fluctuations in stock prices.  
What are the characteristics of a good index of share prices? A good index 
should have two characteristics. First, it should consider a set or group of 
scrips that have high market capitalisation, secondly, these scrips should also 
be highly liquid. Market capitalisation, as we have seen, refers to the sum of 
the market value of all the stocks included in the index. The market value is 
obtained by multiplying the price of the shares by the number of shares 
outstanding. Liquidity refers to the ease with which a share can be bought or 
sold at a price close to the current market price.  
The share price index is calculated for a particular day as a percentage of the 
aggregate market value on that day of the set of stocks included in the index 
to the average market value of the same shares during the base period, for 
example, the BSE Sensex (sensitive Index) is a weighted average of the 
prices of 30 select stocks. Suppose the index is the set of prices of the largest 
25 companies, it means that these companies are largest in terms of market 
capitalisation. Sometimes the index is weighted. If the index is based on the 
price of, say 35 companies, a weighted index implies that a 1%  change in the 
price of the largest companies in the group constituting the index will have 
more impact on the index than a 1% change in the price of the smallest. Since 
share prices are changing frequently, the companies with the top shares do 
not remain the same and hence the constituents of the index can change.  
We must be careful to make a distinction between price averages and price 
indices. In 1884, for example, Charles Dow, publisher of the World Street 
Journal started publishing share price averages. The Dow Jones average 
started with an average of twelve shares. Since 1928, the number of shares 
whose price average is calculated has been thirty. The main index in Japan, 
the Nikkei Dow 225, an index of 225 shares is based on average prices, not 
market capitalisation. Usually, the average is an arithmetic mean, but 
sometimes geometric mean is calculated. For example, the Financial Times  
Ordinary Share Index which began in 1935, calculated the geometric mean of 
the prices of 30 shares. Modern indices are based on taking the number of 
shares and multiplying it by the price. This gives accurate weight to the 
companies with the largest market capitalisation. 
The majority of the stock market indices used in practice fall into two 
categories: 
(i) equal-weighted index, and (ii) value-weighted index. The former is an 
index that reflects the simple arithmetic average of the sample shares at a 
certain time (year, month or day) concerning the base period. The latter 
reflects the aggregate market capitalisation of the sample shares at a certain 
time concerning the base period. Thus, what we had earlier referred to as 


--- Page 35 ---
 
 
205 
Capital Markets price average can also be viewed as equal-weighted index and what we had 
referred simply to price index can be called value-weighted index. 
Some analysts make a fine distinction even between the market 
capitalisation-weighted method and the non-capitalisation-weighted method. 
In this classification, the market capitalisation weighted method can be sub-
classified into three types: full market capitalisation method; free-float 
market capitalisation method and modified capitalisation method.  In the 
first, the number of shares outstanding multiplied by the market price of a 
company’s share determines the scrip’s weight in the index. The shares with 
higher market capitalisation would have greater weightage in this kind of 
index and will exercise greater influence on the overall index. In India, as has 
been mentioned earlier, the BSE Sensex follows this method. So does the 
Nifty. The free-float method does not consider a set constructed from among 
all shares in the market but from a smaller subset of shares. It considers only 
those shares that are freely available for buying in the market and excludes 
strategic investments in a company and shares locked in under employee 
stock-ownership plans. The free-float method  recognises that investible 
market capitalisation may be lower than the total capitalisation. In this 
method, closely held companies would have a much lower weightage. The 
free-floating methodology is quite popular across the world. The third 
method under the market capitalisation method is the modified 
capitalisation method.  This method recognises that if a simple market 
capitalisation method is followed, the largest stocks with huge market 
capitalisation would have a disproportionate weightage and would dominate 
the entire index. Hence, the modified capitalisation method seeks to limit the 
influence of the largest stocks in the index.  
The two other methods for calculating stock price indices are the price-
weighted index and the equal-weighting method. In the former, the price of 
each stock in the index is summed up which is then related to a base value. In 
the equal weighting method, each stock’s percentage weight in the index is 
equal.  
Let us now mention some of the major indices of share prices in India and 
abroad. In India, there are two main indices: the Bombay Stock Exchange 
(BSE) Sensitive index (Sensex) and the National Stock Exchange (NSE) 
Nifty. The BSE Sensex (sometimes called S&P BSE Sensex) was launched in 
1986. It is a free-float market-weighted stock market index of 30 well-
established and financially sound companies listed on the Bombay Stock 
Exchange. It uses large market capitalisation.  
The other major share price index in India is the Nifty of the National Stock 
Exchange. The National Stock Exchange started its trading in capital market 
segment in 1994 and in a very quick time, its volume exceeded that of BSE. 
With collaboration with the Credit Rating Information Services of India 
Limited (CRISIL) and Standard & Poor, the S&P CNX Nifty was launched 
on July 8, 1996, comprising 50 scrips, which are selected based on low 
impact cost, high liquidity and market capitalisation.  Both BSE and NSE use 


--- Page 36 ---
 
 
206 
Financial Markets a weighted average method of weighting, where the weights are in proportion 
to its market capitalisation. 
Other than these two major indices, some other indices are the Economic 
Times Ordinary Share Price Index, Financial Express Ordinary Price 
Index, and the RBI Index of Security Prices. Regional stock exchanges 
such as those in Ahmedabad, Chennai, Delhi and Kolkata have their indices. 
We now state some major indices abroad. A very prominent index is the Dow 
Jones Industrial Average, which is for the New York Stock Exchange, the 
National Association of Securities Dealers Automatic Quotation (NASDAQ), 
the Nikkei in Japan, the Standard &Poor etc.   
Check Your Progress 3 
1)  What is the difference between issue capital and paid-up capital? What 
do you understand by equity premium.? 
.....................................................................................................................
.....................................................................................................................
.....................................................................................................................
..................................................................................................................... 
2)  What are the functions performed by the secondary stock markets?  
.....................................................................................................................
.....................................................................................................................
.....................................................................................................................
..................................................................................................................... 
11.7  LET US SUM UP 
In this unit, light has been thrown on financial markets for long-term funds. 
We have discussed both debt and equity markets. We started by learning 
about the various participants in the capital market. We also came to know 
the important functions that capital markets perform. They perform important 
roles in providing information, enabling matching of sellers and buyers, and 
lowering search costs and transaction costs. The unit then went on to look at 
the comparative methods of raising finance through debt and equity. We 
studied this choice in the context of a representative business firm. This 
choice, which in general terms is called a firm’s capital structure, is part of 
the firm’s financial management. 
We next turned to a discussion of debt markets and equity markets and took 
up their discussion one at a time, separately. We started with the debt markets 
looked at the instruments traded in that market, and discussed some theories 
regarding their pricing. We next studied equity markets, distinguishing 
between primary and secondary markets. We learnt about the way the issues 
are offered in the primary markets and we also looked at the functioning of 


--- Page 37 ---
 
 
207 
Capital Markets secondary markets and learnt about their functions and uses. We studied in 
some detail the way to know if stock markets are advanced and mature in an 
economic system, or are they merely fledgling and poorly developed. We 
then learnt a bit about the volatility that characterises equity markets and how 
these are tackled. Finally, indices of share prices were discussed. We looked 
at the requirements of a good stock price index and came to know the various 
types of indices in use. The unit finally mentioned some of the important 
indices in India and abroad. 
11.8  KEY WORDS 
Coupon                :  The periodic interest paid on a bond. It equals the face 
value of the bond multiplied by the coupon rate of 
interest.   
Coupon Rate       :    Annual coupon amount divided by the face value of 
the bond. 
Equity Premium : When the issue price of an equity share is greater than 
the par value, the difference is called the equity 
premium. 
Leverage             : The ability of a firm to service its debt. 
Market                : 
capitalisation 
The sum of the market value of all the stocks included 
in the index. 
Working capital : Current Assets minus Current Liabilities. 
Par Value            :
                 Specified principal sum a bondholder is scheduled to 
receive when the bond matures. 
11.9  SOME USEFUL BOOKS 
Bhole, L.M. (2004), Financial  Institutions and Markets, 4 th edition , Tata 
McGraw-Hill, New Delhi. 
Dothan, U. (1990),  Prices in Financial Markets , Oxford University Press, 
New York 
Fabozzi, F., Modigliani, F., and Jones, F. (2002) Capital Markets, Institutions 
and Instruments 3rd edition, Prentice-Hall, New Jersey. 
11.10 ANSWERS / HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) Mechanism for bringing together buyers and sellers of various types of 
financial assets, making information processing and dissemination easier, 
help to develop integration among several sectors of the economy. 


--- Page 38 ---
 
 
208 
Financial Markets 2) Current ratio, quick or acid-test ratio; debt ratio and the debt-equity ratio. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) value of the rate of interest that makes the present value of the cash 
stream received from owning the bond equal to the price of the bond. 
2) 
1 (1 ) (1 )
T
t T
t
X MA r r
     
Check Your Progress 3 
1) The amount of capital that a company offers to investors is the issued 
capital.  The part of capital subscribed by investors is called the paid-up 
capital. The par value is the face value of the share. When the issue price 
is greater than the par value, the difference is called the equity premium.  
2) They provide information about the assets’ fair price, as well as liquidity 
from their assets should they want to sell the assets, they reduce search 
costs, by making it easier for buyers and sellers of assets to find each 
other. They also lower transactions cost.    


--- Page 39 ---
209 
Bond Markets UNIT 12   BOND MARKETS 
Structure 
12.0  Objectives 
12.1  Introduction 
12.2  Meaning of Bond Market 
12.3  Meaning of Bond and their Classification 
12.3.1 Meaning of Bonds 
12.3.2 Characteristics of Bonds 
12.3.3 Classification of Bonds 
12.4 Valuation of Bond 
12.5 Bond Yields 
12.5.1 Yield to Maturity 
12.5.2 Yield to Call 
12.5.3 Current Yield 
12.6 Credit Rating 
12.7 Bond Market in India 
12.7.1 Bond Market - A Part of The Debt Market in India 
12.7.2 Regulators  
12.7.3 The Growth of Indian Bond Market  
12.7.4 Classification of the Debt Instruments  
12.8 Let Us Sum Up 
12.9 Key Words 
12.10 Some Useful Books 
12.11 Answers/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
12.0     OBJECTIVES 
After going through this unit, you will be able to: 
 state the concept of the bond market;
 define bonds and categorize them according to their different types;
 evaluate the valuation of bonds across various scenarios, including
regular coupon bonds, floating coupon bonds, and perpetual bonds;
 discuss bond yields such as Yield to Maturity, Yield to Call, and Current
Yield; and
 elucidate and analyze credit rating,


--- Page 40 ---
210 
Financial Markets 12.1 INTRODUCTION 
Suppose that a company needs ₹ 500 crore for some project and it does not 
want to approach a bank for a loan, then what are the alternatives available? 
One of the alternatives is the bond market. A bond market is a place where a 
company can raise loans by issuing a loan-taking certificate (technically 
known as a bond). Thus, an investor can purchase and sell bonds in a bond 
market. The present unit aims to discuss the functioning of a bond market and 
its product i.e., bonds. After reading this unit, you would be able to calculate 
the value of a bond and make the decision to sell or buy the bond. You will 
also be able to understand various terms used in the bond market e.g., Yield 
to Maturity, Yield to Call, Current Yield, Coupon rate, etc. Since bonds carry 
default and other types of risk, therefore, bonds with good ratings are 
preferred. The last section of this unit explains the credit rating.   
12.2 MEANING OF BOND MARKET 
Bonds are loans that investors make to borrowers’ entities in exchange for 
interest payments (zero, fixed, or floating) made over a defined period. 
The bond market serves as a way for the borrowers to raise capital, and for 
investors to earn interest income on their investments. Alternatively, a bond 
market (also known as a debt market, fixed-income market, or credit market) 
is the collective name given to all trades and issues of debt securities. The 
bond market broadly describes a marketplace where investors buy debt 
securities that are brought to the market by either governmental entities or 
corporations. 
The bond market can be divided into two main categories: the primary 
market and the secondary market . In the primary market, new bonds are 
issued and sold to investors for the first time. In other words, the primary 
market is frequently referred to as the new issues market in which 
transactions strictly occur directly between the bond issuers and the bond 
buyers. In essence, the primary market yields the creation of brand-new debt 
securities that have not previously been offered to the public. In the 
secondary market, existing bonds are bought and sold among investors. The 
secondary market provides liquidity to investors, allowing them to sell their 
bonds before maturity if they need to raise cash or want to invest in other 
assets. In the secondary market, securities that have already been sold in the 
primary market are then bought and sold at later dates. Investors can purchase 
these bonds from a broker, who acts as an intermediary between the buying 
and selling parties. These secondary market issues may be packaged in the 
form of pension funds, mutual funds, and life insurance policies — among 
many other product structures. 
The bond market is important to the broader economy because it helps to set 
interest rates for other financial products, such as mortgages and loans. It also 
plays a significant role in determining the cost of borrowing for corporations 
