--- Page 1 ---
 
 
171 
Money Markets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Block 4 
Financial Markets 
Unit 10  Money Markets  
Unit 11  Capital Markets  
Unit 12  Bond Markets  
Unit 13  Derivatives  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 2 ---
 
 
172 
Financial Markets UNIT 10 MONEY MARKETS    
Structure 
10.0 Objectives 
10.1 Introduction 
10.2  Concept and Features of Money Market 
10.2.1 Concept of Money Market 
10.2.2 Distinctive Features of Money Market 
10.3 Objectives and Functions of Money Market  
10.4  Requisites of a Good Functioning Money Market 
10.5  Money Market in India 
 10.5.1 Organised Sector  
10.5.2 Instruments of Organised Markets 
 10.5.3 Unorganised Sector   
10.6  Regulatory Measures to Streamline the Working of Money Market 
10.7 Problems of the Indian Money Market 
10.8 Let Us Sum Up  
10.9 Key Words 
10.10 Some Useful Books 
10.11 Answers / Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises  
10.12  Terminal Questions 
10.0 OBJECTIVES 
Having completed this unit, you will be able to: 
 explain the concept of the money market; 
 spell out the composition of the money market; 
 highlight the importance, role and functions of the money market in 
an economy; 
 identify requisites of a good money market; 
 describe the Indian money market;  
 analyse the various regulatory mechanisms governing the working of 
the money market in India; and 
 indicate the problems of the Indian money market.  
 
 


--- Page 3 ---
 
 
173 
Money Markets 10.1 INTRODUCTION 
As we have learnt in previous block that financial institutions, financial 
markets and instruments together constitute the financial system. Thus, 
financial markets are one of the important constituents of financial system. 
The financial markets of all economies are broadly subdivided into two parts: 
(i) Money Market , and (ii) Capital Market . Both these markets provide 
avenues to surplus sectors such as households and institutions to deploy their 
funds and opportunity to corporate and government sectors to mobilize funds 
for their requirements. Financial markets across the world are organised 
differently to serve the need to save, borrow, invest, transact, and insure. 
They vary on regulations, ownership type, level of consolidation, etc.  
The money market refers to a section of the financial market having financial 
instruments with high liquidity and short-term maturities that usually range 
from overnight to just under a year such as treasury bills and commercial 
papers.  
The money market is considered a safe place to invest due to the high 
liquidity of securities. It has certain risks which investors should be aware of, 
one of them being default on securities such as commercial papers. The 
money market consists of various financial institutions and dealers, who make 
available to a broad range of borrowers and investors the opportunity to buy 
and sell various forms of short-term securities. The money market gives 
lesser returns to investors who invest in it but provides a variety of 
products. Withdrawing money from the money market is easier. The presence 
of an active and vibrant money market is an essential prerequisite for the 
growth and development of an economy. This unit will throw light on the 
various facets of the money market along with the structure and functions of 
the Indian money market.  
The money market  being an important segment of the financial market, 
not only reflects the impact of liquidity mismatch in the system but also 
operates as the first leg in transmitting monetary policy changes to the 
other parts of the financial system. In an integrated financial system, the 
occurrence of an event in one market of the financial system will have an 
impact on the other market of the system. 
The money market enables asset-liability management  in commercial banks. 
It provides an avenue for short-term investment in respect of cash held to 
maintain sufficient liquidity through its many sub-markets. The larger the 
number of sub-markets the broader and more developed the structure of the 
money market. The interest rates and the conditions prevailing in the money 
market influence the rate of interest  and mobilization of resources in the 
capital market, the foreign exchange market and the gilt securities market. 
Thus, the development of these markets, to a large extent, is dependent on the 
development of the money market. The money market largely is a tool for the 


--- Page 4 ---
 
 
174 
Financial Markets development of industry, infrastructure, agriculture, trading and commerce in 
any country.  
10.2 CONCEPT AND FEATURES OF MONEY 
MARKET 
10.2.1  Concept of Money Market 
A money market is a market for short-term money and financial assets that 
are close substitutes for money.  By the term ‘Short-term’ in the Indian 
context, it means a period of up to one year.  According to the Reserve Bank 
of India , a money market is ‘the centre for dealings, mainly of short-term 
character, in money assets. It meets the short-term requirements of borrowers 
and provides liquidity or cash to the lenders. It is the place where short-term 
surplus investible funds at the disposal of financial and other institutions and 
individuals are bid by borrowers’ agents comprising institutions and 
individuals and also the government itself.  The money market is essentially 
an over-the-phone market where transactions are conducted online or through 
telephonic communication with or without the help of brokers to be followed 
subsequently by written documents and exchange of instruments. It is a 
mechanism to clear short-term monetary transactions in an economy.  
Individuals, institutions, and the government are economic agents that 
participate in the money market. These agencies create demand for money 
and also ensure the supply of money for a short-term period. The demand for 
money emanates from merchants, traders, brokers, manufacturers, speculators 
and even government institutions. The suppliers include commercial banks, 
insurance companies, non-banking financial concerns and the Central Bank 
of the country. The money market consists of many sub-markets. According 
to Vaghul Committee, “ The money market is a market for short-term 
financial assets that are close substitutes for money. The important feature 
of money market instruments is that it is liquid and can be turned over 
quickly at low cost, and it provides an avenue for equilibrating the short-
term surplus funds of lenders and the requirements of borrowers .” 
 10.2.2 The Distinctive Features of the Money Market 
i) The money market consists of negotiable instruments. It is used by many 
participants, including companies, to raise funds by selling commercial 
papers in the market. The money market is considered a safe place to 
invest due to the high liquidity of securities.   
ii) The money market is a market for short-term financial assets which can 
be turned over quickly at a low cost. It provides an avenue for 
equilibrating the short-term surplus funds of lenders and the 
requirements of borrowers. 
iii) It is one market but a collection of markets, such as, call money, notice 
money, repose, term money, treasury bills, commercial bills, 
certificate of deposits, commercial papers, inter-bank participation 


--- Page 5 ---
 
 
175 
Money Markets certificates, inter-corporate deposits, swaps futures, options, etc. and is 
concerned to deal in a particular type of assets. Its chief characteristic 
is its relative liquidity. All the sub-markets have close inter-
relationships and free movement of funds from one sub-market to 
another. There has to be a network of a large number of participants 
which will add greater depth to the market. 
iv) The activities in the money market tend to concentrate in some centre 
which serves a region or an area; the width of such area may vary 
considerably in some markets like London and New York which have 
become world financial centres. Where more than one market exists in 
a country, with screen-based trading and revolutions in information 
technology, such markets have rapidly become integrated into a 
national market. In India, Mumbai is emerging as a national market for 
money market instruments. 
v) An important feature of the money market is its’ impersonal character 
so that competition will be relatively pure. The money market is 
entirely different where no visible shops and counters exist. 
vi) Trading is a wholesale process as the volume of funds or financial assets 
traded in the money market is very large.   
10.3 OBJECTIVES AND  FUNCTIONS OF MONEY 
MARKET  
Objectives: The major objectives of money market are enlisted below: 
i) A parking place to employ short-term surplus funds. 
ii) Room for overcoming short-term deficits. 
iii) Reasonable access to users of short-term funds to meet their requirements 
quickly, adequately and at reasonable costs. 
iv) The Central Bank to influence and regulate liquidity in the economy 
through its intervention in this market. 
The money market is an important part of the economy. It plays a very 
significant role in facilitating the various sectors of the economy in the 
following manner: 
i) Financing Trade:  The money market provides financing to local and 
international traders who are in urgent need of short-term funds. It 
provides a facility to discount bills of exchange, and thereby providing 
finance to pay for goods and services. International traders benefit from 
the acceptance houses and discount markets. The money market also 
makes funds available for other units of the economy such as agriculture 
and small-scale industries. 
ii) Help in Implementing Central Bank Policies : The money market 
provides a base and mechanism for effective implementation of the 
monetary policy. Through the money market, the central bank can 


--- Page 6 ---
 
 
176 
Financial Markets perform its policy-making function efficiently. Integrated money markets 
help the central bank to influence the sub-markets and thereby getting its 
monetary policy implemented. Central Bank ensures that the liquidity 
and the short-term interest rates are consistent with the monetary policy. 
iii) Growth of Business and Industries: The money market is important for 
businesses because it allows companies with a temporary cash surplus to 
invest in short-term securities; conversely, companies with a temporary 
cash shortfall can sell securities or borrow funds on a short-term basis. In 
essence, the market acts as a repository for short-term funds and to 
finance the working capital needs. Although the money market does not 
provide long-term loans, it influences the capital market and can also 
help businesses obtain long-term financing. The capital market 
benchmarks its interest rates based on the prevailing interest rate in the 
money market. 
iv) Self-Sufficiency to Commercial Banks:  The money market provides 
commercial banks with a ready market where they can invest their excess 
reserves and earn interest while maintaining liquidity. Short-term 
investments such as bills of exchange can easily be converted to cash to 
support customer withdrawals. Also, when faced with liquidity problems, 
they can borrow from the money market on a short-term basis as an 
alternative to borrowing from the central bank. The advantage of this is 
that the money market may charge lower interest rates on short-term 
loans than the central bank typically does. 
v) Other functions: Promotes economic growth by making funds available 
to various units in the economy such as agriculture, small-scale 
industries, etc. and makes available investment avenues for short-term 
periods. It helps in generating savings and investments in the economy. 
The money market provides non-inflationary sources of finance to the 
government. It is possible to raise short-term loans by issuing treasury 
bills which does not lead to an increase in the prices. In short, the 
functions of the money market are:   
i) It provides an equilibrating mechanism for evening out short-term 
surpluses and deficits. 
ii) A focal point for central bank intervention for influencing liquidity 
in the economy as per monetary policy. 
iii) Reasonable access to the users of short-term money to meet their 
requirements at realistic prices i.e., rate of interest. 
10.4  REQUISITES FOR A GOOD FUNCTIONING 
MONEY MARKET 
A good money market is one of the prerequisites for a nation’s economic 
progress and the effective implementation of monetary policy. A money 
market is considered ‘developed’ if it satisfies the following conditions:  


--- Page 7 ---
 
 
177 
Money Markets i) Institutional development, relative political stability and a reasonably 
well-developed highly organised commercial banking and financial 
systems.  
ii) The presence of a strong and efficient Central bank ensures credibility in 
the system, supervision of the players in the market and facilitation of 
the implementation of monetary policy by way of open market 
operations.  
iii) Promote financial mobility in the form of inter-sectoral flows of funds. 
iv) Continuous supply of negotiable securities such as bills of exchange, 
treasury bills, short-term Government bonds, etc. The market should 
have varied instruments with distinctive maturity and risk profiles to 
meet the varied appetites of the players in the market. Multiple 
instruments add strength and depth to the market.  
v) Existence of several sub-markets, each specialising in a particular type of 
short-term asset. The larger the number of sub-markets, the broader and 
more developed will be the structure of the money market. The funds 
should move from one segment of the market to another to exploit the 
advantages of arbitrage opportunities. The sub-markets should form an 
integrated structure in which every segment of the money market is in an 
intimate relationship with each other. This is essential to ensure 
uniformity of interest rates in various sub-markets and also for the free 
flow of funds. This helps channelising savings into productive 
investments (like working capital). 
vi) The market should be integrated with the rest of the markets in the 
financial system to ensure perfect equilibrium. Efficient payment 
systems for clearing and settlement of transactions. The introduction of 
Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT), Depository System, Delivery versus 
Payment (DVP), High-Value Inter-bank Payment System, etc. are 
essential prerequisites for ensuring a risk-free and transparent payment 
and settlement system.  
vii) Unlike capital markets  or commodity markets, trading in the money 
market is concluded over the telephone followed by written 
confirmation from the contracting parties. Hence, integrity is sine qua 
non. Thus, banks and other players in the market may have to be licensed 
and effectively supervised by regulators.  
There are not many developed money markets in the world which have all the 
above-said features. London and New York money markets are the best 
examples of developed money markers. Other examples of international 
financial markets are Paris, Zurich, Frankfurt, Amsterdam and Vienna which 
contain most of the features of developed money markets.  
 


--- Page 8 ---
 
 
178 
Financial Markets Check Your Progress 1 
1) Define the Money Market.  
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
2) Describe main features of Money Market. 
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
3) What constitutes a good Money Market? 
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
10.5  MONEY MARKET IN INDIA 
The Indian money market has a dichotomic structure. It has a simultaneous 
existence of both the organized money market as well as unorganised money 
markets.  
10.5.1  Organised Sector 
The organised segment is quite integrated and well-organised. The organised 
money market is in full control of the RBI. In organized markets, there are 
standardized rules and regulations governing their financial dealings. There is 
also a high degree of institutionalization and instrumentalization. These 
markets are subject to strict supervision and control by the RBI or other 
regulatory bodies. The nature of the money market transactions is such that 
they are large in amount and high in volume. Thus, the entire market is 
dominated by a small number of large players. At the same time, the money 
market in India is yet underdeveloped. The organized money market in India 
is not a single market but is a conglomeration of markets of various 
instruments which can broadly be put into the call money market, the bill 
market, and other sub-markets.   
Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Delhi, Bangalore and Ahmedabad are the leading 
centres of the organised sectors of the Indian money market. The Mumbai 
money market is well organised, having head offices of the RBI and different 
commercial banks, two leading well-developed stock exchanges, the bullion 
exchange and a fairly organised market for Government securities. All these 
have placed the Mumbai money market at par with the New York money 
market of the USA and the London money market of England. 


--- Page 9 ---
 
 
179 
Money Markets 10.5.2  Instruments of Organised Markets 
There are different varieties of money market instruments, but all have a few 
things in common. In India, the introduction of a host of new instruments 
[certificates of deposit (CDs), commercial paper (CPs), inter-bank 
participation certificates, and money market mutual funds  (MMMF)] have 
made the Indian money market a vibrant one. The instruments of the money 
market are characterized by short duration, large volume and deregulated 
interest rates. The instruments are highly liquid. They also are safe 
investments owing to the issuer’s inherent financial strength.  
i) The call money market : Call money refers to the unsecured segment 
of the money market that is designed for the management of liquidity 
for a very short period — mostly overnight. If the period is more than 
two days and up to 14 days it is called ‘ Notice money’. Money lent for 
15 days to 1 year is called ‘Term money’. The call market enables 
banks to even out their day-to-day demand for and supply of short-term 
funds. This market is a purely unsecured market as no collateral is 
offered for securing the funds and there are no brokers involved. 
Settlement is done between the participants through the current account 
maintained with the RBI. The ease of transacting as well as the low 
transaction costs arising from the least documentation and same-day 
settlement of funds act as strong incentives for banks to access the call 
money market for managing intra-day funding requirements.  
The money invested by banks in the call money market provides high 
liquidity with limited profitability. The call money market in India takes 
the form of an inter-bank  call money market  wherein the banks with 
surplus lend to the needy banks. Banks usually borrow funds in this 
market to meet their statutory obligations  about the keeping of reserves 
with the Reserve Bank. The rate of interest in this market is highly 
volatile and sensitive to changes in the demand and supply of funds, 
with the changes taking place several times during the day. It is looked 
upon as the barometer of the money market . The call money rates also 
move in certain phases. For example, April, May and October generally 
witness high rates and high volatility while in January and August, the 
rates are lower and steady. Various measures have been taken by RBI to 
reduce volatility in call rates. The setting up of the Discount and 
Finance House of India ( DFHI) in 1988 was to broaden the base of the 
call loan market. DFHI has now assumed the role of market maker in 
the call loan market but due to its inadequate resources, it has not been 
able to supply enough funds to check volatility. 
This is the most important instrument in terms of volume of 
transactions and in the sense that rates in this market are indicative of 
conditions prevailing in the money market . The rates of other 
instruments are linked to the rates obtained in the call market. The 
principal call loan centre is Mumbai which accounts for nearly 85 to 90 
per cent of the business transacted. The other centres are Kolkata, 


--- Page 10 ---
 
 
180 
Financial Markets Delhi, Chennai, Bengaluru and Ahmedabad . The major players in this 
market are commercial banks and DFHI who can both borrow and lend. 
Select financial institutions like UTI, LIC, IDBI, NABARD etc. have 
been permitted to operate in the call market as lenders which helps them 
in effective cash management.  
 ii)  The bill market : The bill market can be divided into two: (i) the 
treasury bills market, and (ii) the commercial bills market. 
a)  Treasury bills : The Union Government raises operational cash by 
issuing treasury bills.  The Treasury bill is a short-term government 
security having a maturity period ranging from a few days to a few 
months. The instrument is sold by the Central Bank on behalf of 
the government. Treasury bills are promissory notes and at present, 
these are being issued for 3 maturities viz. (i) 91 days, (ii) 182 
days, and (iii) 364 days. Treasury bills are zero coupon securities 
and pay no interest. Instead, they are issued at a discount and 
redeemed at the face value at maturity. For example, a 91-day 
Treasury bill of ₹100/- (face value) may be issued at say ₹ 98.20, 
that is, at a discount of say, ₹1.80 and would be redeemed at the 
face value of ₹100/-. The return to the investors is the difference 
between the maturity value or the face value (that is ₹100) and the 
issue price. The treasury bills are generally sold by auction to the 
highest bidder. Being government papers, the treasury bills enthuse 
the confidence of a greater number of investors. Treasury bills are 
good papers for commercial banks to invest their short-term funds. 
There is no default risk associated with such instruments. They are 
approved assets for Statutory Liquidity Ratio  (SLR). DFHI is the 
market maker in these  instruments. This is the most important 
instrument for hedging against volatility in the call loan market. All 
T-Bills auctions are Price-based and are auctioned on Multiple-
Price basis. 
b)  Commercial bill market: bills rediscounting scheme (BRS) : 
This scheme has been operative since 1970. Commercial banks are 
permitted to issue derivative usance promissory notes for maturity 
not more than 90 days backed by genuine trade bills of similar 
tenor. This can be further rediscounted by the holder by 
endorsement and delivery. The stamp duty on this usance 
promissory note was waived in 1989. All commercial banks are 
eligible to issue usance promissory notes  which can be discounted 
by commercial banks, select financial institutions and urban 
cooperative banks. DFHI participates actively in this market and 
provides bid rates daily. This assures liquidity to the instruments. 
This is a very important source of funds for commercial banks as 
borrowing under BRS is not included as a liability while 
calculating Net Demand and Time Liability (NDTL). Due to high 
