--- Page 1 ---
MEC - 110
MONEY  FINANCIAL 
INSTITUTIONS & MARKETS
BANK
VOLUME-II


--- Page 2 ---
MEC-110
School of Social Sciences
Indira Gandhi National Open University
New Delhi
Money, Financial
Institutions and Markets
(Volume-2)


--- Page 3 ---
EXPERT COMMITTEE
COURSE PREPAREATION TEAM
Prof. Atul Sarma (Retd.)
Former Director
Indian Statistical Institute
New Delhi
Prof. Indrani Roy Chowdhury
CSRD, School of Social Sciences
Jawaharlal Nehru University
New Delhi
Prof. Prem S.Vashistha
Former Director, Agro
Economic Research Centre
Delhi School of Economics
University of Delhi
New Delhi
Prof. Subrata Guha
CESP, School of Social Sciences
Jawaharlal Nehru University
New Delhi
Dr. Rajeev Malhotra
Professor & Executive Director
OP Jindal Global University
Gurugram, Haryana
Prof. Kaustuva Barik
Indira Gandhi National
Open University
New Delhi
Prof. B S Prakash
Indira Gandhi National
Open University
New Delhi
Sh. Saugato Sen
Associate Professor of
Economics, Indira Gandhi
National Open University
New Delhi
Dr. Vijeta Banwari
Associate Professor of
Economics, Indira Gandhi
National Open University
New Delhi
Dr. Nidhi Tewathia
Associate Professor of
Economics
Ambedkar University
New Delhi
Prof. Narayan Prasad
(Convener)
Indira Gandhi National
Open University
New Delhi
PROGRAMME COORDINATORS
Prof. Narayan Prasad
Professor of Economics
School of Social Sciences
IGNOU, New Delhi
Dr. Vijeta Banwari
Associate Professor
School of Social Sciences
IGNOU, New Delhi
COURSE COORDINATOR
Dr. Vijeta Banwari, Associate Professor
School of Social Sciences, IGNOU
New Delhi
COURSE EDITORS FORMAT AND LANGUAGE EDITING
Dr. Vijeta Banwari (Block 5)
Shri Saugato Sen (Block 6)
Prof. K. Barik (Block 7)
Dr. Vijeta Banwari
Associate Professor
School of Social Sciences, IGNOU
New Delhi
Block/   Unit Title Unit Writers
Unit No.
BLOCK 5  FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
Unit 14 Commercial Banking Prof. S.K. Singh, Retd. Prof. of
Economics, IGNOU, New Delhi
Unit 15 Non-Bank Financial Intermediaries Prof. S.K. Singh, Retd. Prof. of
Economics, IGNOU, New Delhi
Unit 16 Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) Prof. S.K. Singh, Retd. Prof. of
Economics, IGNOU, New Delhi
Unit 17 Other Financial Institutions and Regulations Prof. S.K. Singh, Retd. Prof. of
Economics, IGNOU, New Delhi
BLOCK 6  OPERATIONAL  ASPECTS OF FINANCIAL MARKETS
Unit 18 Efficient Portfolio Frontier Dr. Vijeta Banwari
Associate Professor, IGNOU
New Delhi
Unit 19 Capital Asset Pricing Model Dr. Ruchi Sharma
Assistant Professor
Aryabhatta College, Delhi University


--- Page 4 ---
Unit 20 Arbitrage Pricing Theory Dr. Apica Sharma
Researcher
Department of Revenue, Ministry of
Finance, Government of India
Unit 21 Pricing of Derivatives Dr. Apica Sharma
Researcher
Department of Revenue, Ministry of
Finance, Government of India
Unit 22 Corporate Finance Dr. Ruchika Gehlot
Associate Professor
Maharaja Surajmal Institute
New Delhi
Unit 23 Foreign Direct Investment and Foreign Dr. Monika Tushir
Portfolio Investment Associate Professor
Maharaja Surajmal Institute
New Delhi
BLOCK 7  FINANCIAL STABILITY
Unit 24 Macroeconomics, Finance, and Business Cycles Dr. Jyoti Mavi
Assistant Professor
Gargi College, Delhi University
Dr. Devendra Kumar
Assistant Professor
Daulat Ram College, Delhi University
Unit 25 Efficient Markets Hypothesis Dr. Sant Kumar
Assistant Professor of Economics
Vivekanand Institute of Professional
Studies, New Delhi
Unit 26 Financial Stability and Related Issues Dr. Monika Tushir
Associate Professor
Maharaja Surajmal Institute
New Delhi
Unit 27 Non-performing Assets Prof. S.K. Singh, Retd. Prof. of
Economics, IGNOU, New Delhi
Unit 28 Foreign Exchange Stability and Related Issues Dr. Sant Kumar
Assistant Professor of Economics
Vivekanand Institute of Professional
Studies, New Delhi
Unit 29 Behavioural Finance Dr. Vijeta Banwari, Associate
Professor, IGNOU, New Delhi
August, 2024
 Indira Gandhi National Open University, 2024
ISBN :
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced in any form, by mimeograph or any other
means, without permission in writing from the Indira Gandhi National Open University.
Further information about the School of Social Sciences and the Indira Gandhi National Open
University courses may be obtained from the University’ s office at Maidan Garhi, New Delhi-110 068.
or visit the University website http://www.ignou.ac.in.
Printed and published on behalf of the Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi by the The
Registrar, MPDD, IGNOU, New Delhi.
Photographs/diagrams/maps/drawings and other academic materials and text used in this course for
academic purposes are gratefully acknowledged and credited. Should any infringement have occurred,
the publishers and editors apologise and will be pleased to make the necessary corrections in future
editions of this book.
Laser Typesetting : Akashdeep Printers, 20-Ansari Road, Daryaganj, New Delhi-110002
Printed at :
PRINT  PRODUCTION
Mr. Tilak Raj
Assistant Registrar,
MPDD, IGNOU, New Delhi


--- Page 5 ---


--- Page 6 ---
Course Contents
Pages
COURSE  INTRODUCTION 7
BLOCK 5  FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 9
Unit 14 Commercial Banking 10
Unit 15 Non Bank Financial Intermediaries 30
Unit 16 SEBI 50
Unit 17 Other Financial Institutions and Regulations 74
BLOCK 6  OPERATIONAL ASPECTS OF FINANCIAL MARKETS 95
Unit 18 Efficient Portfolio Frontier 96
Unit 19 Capital Asset Pricing Model 113
Unit 20 Arbitrage Pricing Theory 131
Unit 21 Pricing of Derivatives 144
Unit 22 Corporate Finance 163
Unit 23 Foreign Direct Investment and Foreign Portfolio Investment 189
BLOCK 7  FINANCIAL STABILITY 205
Unit 24 Macroeconomics, Finance, and Business Cycles 206
Unit 25 Efficient Markets Hypothesis 220
Unit 26 Financial Stability and Related Issues 234
Unit 27 Non-performing Assets 249
Unit 28 Foreign Exchange Stability and Related Issues 270
Unit 29 Behavioural Finance 289


--- Page 7 ---
6
Overview of Occupational
Health


--- Page 8 ---
7
Occupational Health:
Meaning and ConceptCOURSE   INTRODUCTION
MEC 110: Money, Financial Institutions and Markets
The structure of MA Economics programme has been spread over four semesters. In
each of the first three semesters, three courses (in the multiple of six or eight credits)
have been included in a well thought manner. The two courses i.e., Micro Economic
Analysis (MEC-101) and Macro Economic Analysis (MEC-102) provide the theoretical
foundation and the knowledge of mathematical and statistical tools in MEC 203, enabling
to understand micro and macro theories in analytical manner. Another set of three
courses included in semester two lead to further insight into the area of growth and
development. The knowledge of economic theory both in micro and macro domain
and insight into growth and development prepare the foundation for entering the empirical
part and take up the various components of Indian economics policy (MEC-205).
Knowledge of theoretical and applied part of economics make a solid ground for
making in-depth study of various economic events, developments and situations.
However, before taking up in-depth study, the knowledge of conceptual foundation,
tools and techniques of research methodology is required. These have been provided
in the course Research Methods in Economics (MEC 109).
Having the knowledge of core courses in the first and the second semesters, with the
intention to have knowledge of area specific core courses, another set of three courses
viz., Public Economics (MEC-106) International Trade and Development (MEC-107)
and Money, Financial Institutions and Markets (MEC 110) have been introduced in
the third semester.
We have covered issues related to monetary policy in macro-economic analysis, yet
the various topics related to monetary economics such as functions of money and its
relation and interaction with financial institutions and markets could not be covered,
which are otherwise essential to have insight into the functioning of various kinds of
markets in the economy . Hence, MEC 110 course as an extension of macro dimension
of economics has been included in this semester.
In order to comprehend this course in a meaningful manner, students should have a
clear idea of the conceptual foundations and functioning of the financial system. In this
process, it is necessary to understand the role and functions of money, and the
transmission mechanism of monetary policy .
This course is extremely relevant because money, financial institutions, and markets
form the cornerstone of modern economies. They serve as the channels through which
resources are allocated, transactions are facilitated, and economic prosperity is achieved.
Their roles are multifaceted and intertwined, shaping the economic landscape and
impacting the lives of individuals, businesses, and societies around the globe. Thus,
understanding functions of money , financial institutions, and markets, interactions, and
implications is essential for policymakers, economists, investors, and citizens alike,
helping them to navigate the complexities of the financial system.
The course discusses how capital flows through the economy and how financial
intermediaries play a crucial role in channelling funds between surplus and deficit units
in the economy. It deliberates upon the roles, functions, and regulatory frameworks of
money markets, capital markets, bond markets, and derivatives. It also provides insights
into market dynamics, participant behaviour, and factors driving asset valuations. The


--- Page 9 ---
8
Overview of Occupational
Health
course also delves into functioning of Commercial banks, non-bank financial
intermediaries, and regulatory bodies which form the backbone of the financial system
and play an important role in maintaining economic stability .  Further, it equips with the
understanding of ‘Efficient Portfolio Frontier’ and asset pricing theories which are
essential for investors seeking to optimize returns and manage risk. To understand the
challenges and complexities of maintaining a stable financial system, this course also
presents the comprehensive understanding of non-performing assets, foreign exchange
stability , and behavioural finance.
This course is divided into eight blocks. Each block is interconnected. The structure of
the course is as follows:
Block 5 entitled Financial Institutions, we have discussed how financial institutions
form the backbone of the financial system and channelise funds between savers and
investors. There are four units in this block. It explores the roles of commercial banks,
non-bank financial intermediaries, regulatory bodies such as SEBI, and other institutions
that shape the landscape of finance.
Block 6: Operational Aspects of Financial Markets has six units. This block
delves into risk-return analysis, the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), the Arbitrage
Pricing Theory (APT). The block also presents various models of derivative pricing. It
also discusses corporate finance principles, and the dynamics of foreign investment.
Block 7 throws light on various aspects of Financial Stability. It includes six units.
Financial stability is paramount for sustainable economic growth, and this final block
examines its connection with business cycles, market efficiency , non-performing assets,
foreign exchange stability , and behavioural finance. It provides insights into the challenges
and complexities of maintaining a stable financial system.


--- Page 10 ---
9 
Commercial Banking 
Block 5 
Financial Institutions 
Unit 14 Commercial Banking 
Unit 15 Non-Bank Financial Intermediaries 
Unit 16 SEBI 
Unit 17 Other Financial Institutions and 
Regulations 
