--- Page 31 ---
30 
Financial Institutions UNIT 15 NON-BANKING FINANCIAL 
INSTITUTIONS 
Structure   
15.0 Objectives    
15.1 Introduction 
15.2  Concept of Non-Banking Financial Institutions (NBFIs) 
15.2.1  Difference between Commercial Banks and NBFI S 
15.3  Functions and Importance of NBFIs  
15.4  Size and Structure  of NBFIs in India  
15.5     Non-Banking Financial Companies 
15.5.1. Ownership Pattern of NBFCs 
15.5.2 Financial Indicators of NBFCs 
15.5.3 Regulatory Mechanism for NBFCs 
15.6  Housing Finance Companies (HFCs) 
15.7  All India Financial Institutions (AIFIs) 
15.8   Primary Dealers (PDs) 
15.9   Issues and Concerns in the NBFIs Sector 
15.10  Let Us Sum Up 
15.11 Key Words 
15.12  Some Useful Books and References 
15.13 Answers/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
15.14   Terminal Questions   
15.0  OBJECTIVES 
Having completed this unit, you will be able to: 
 explain the concept of non-banking financial institutions;
 distinguish between banks and NBFIs;
 describe the functions and importance of NBFIs;
 describe different categories of NBFIs-NBFCs, HFCs, AIFIs, PDs;
 analyse the size and working of NBFIs;
 discuss the regulatory mechanism of NBFCs; and
 examine the issues and concerns related to NBFIs.


--- Page 32 ---
31 
Non-Bank Financial 
Intermediaries 15.1  INTRODUCTION 
We have already discussed the financial system in Block 1. You may recall 
that it implies a set of complex and closely connected or interlinked financial 
institutions, agents, practices, markets, transactions, claims, and liabilities in 
the economy. Non-Banking Financial Institutions (NBFIs) are also a 
constituent of the institutional structure of the organized financial system in 
India. They provide liquidity and safety to financial assets and help to 
transfer funds from ultimate lenders to ultimate borrowers for productive 
purposes. NBFIs have evolved as an important alternate source of credit in 
the Indian economy. They complement the mainstream banking system in the 
process of financial intermediation.  They increase capital formation and 
consequently lead to economic growth.  
The NBFI sector is characterised by its heterogeneity. It is heterogeneous in 
terms of size, business spread and ownership. World over, there is an 
awakening, after the great ﬁnancial crisis 2008. This awakening has led to 
enhanced attention, monitoring and regulation of the non-banking ﬁnancial 
sector. The Financial Stability Board  (FSB) came into existence to address 
vulnerabilities and to develop and implement strong regulatory, supervisory 
and other policies in the interest of financial stability. In this unit, you will 
study the various facets of non-bank financial institutions.       
15.2 CONCEPT OF NON-BANKING FINANCIAL 
INSTITUTIONS (NBFIS) 
NBFIs comprise a mixed bag of institutions, ranging from leasing, factoring, 
and venture capital companies to various contractual savings and institutional 
investors (pension funds, insurance companies, and mutual funds). These 
specialised intermediaries leverage on lower transaction costs, financial 
innovations and regulatory arbitrage. NBFIs facilitate bank-related financial 
services, such as investment , risk pooling, contractual savings,  and market 
brokering. They provide services not necessarily suited to banks and 
specialize in sectors or groups.  
The world over, non-banking financial entities complement the mainstream 
banking system in the process of financial intermediation. Regarded as 
shadow banks by the Financial Stability Board (FSB) –“entities and activities 
(fully or partially) outside the regular banking system” , these specialised 
intermediaries leverage on lower transaction costs, financial innovations and 
regulatory arbitrage. The shadow banking sector in India primarily includes 
NBFCs and collective investment vehicles such as money market funds, fixed 
income funds, mixed funds, real estate funds, and securitisation-based credit 
intermediation like securitisation vehicles and structured finance vehicles. 
15.2.1 Difference between Commercial Banks and NBFIS 
As we know, a Commercial Bank is an organization that accepts cash 
deposits from customers and then provides financial services like bank 


--- Page 33 ---
 
 
32 
Financial Institutions accounts, loans, share trading accounts, mutual funds, etc. Commercial Banks 
and NBFIs are very important constituents of the financial system of a 
country.  Despite certain similarities, commercial banks differ from non-bank 
financial institutions (NBFIs) on the following grounds: 
i) As distinct from commercial and cooperative banks, NBFIs are a 
heterogeneous category of financial institutions. Commercial Banks 
form a homogeneous group doing banking business.  
ii) NBFIs cover a wide field of institutions ranging from highly specialised 
ones such as development banks to simple organisations like mutual 
saving societies. The NBFIs focus on niche areas of business 
addressing specific needs of customers. Therefore, the Reserve Bank 
has classiﬁed varieties of speciﬁc types of NBFIs separately and 
regulates each type differently. 
(iii)  Usually, commercial banks are confined to only short-term loans in the 
money market. NBFIs are spread over the entire range of financial 
markets supplying short, medium and long-term credit. However, now 
days commercial banks also provide short-term, medium-term and 
long-term credit to all sectors of the economy as well as all segments of 
the society. 
(iv)  Commercial banks generate multiple expansions of credit. NBFIs only 
mobilise savings for investment. Commercial banks’ credit creation is 
determined by the availability of excess reserves and the cash reserve 
ratio. The rate of interest has little significance in this matter. On the 
other hand, NBFIs’ operations and saving mobilisation processes are 
largely governed by the structure of the rate of interest. NBFIs have to 
pay high interest to attract more funds. People invest their savings with 
NBFIs with the economic motive of earning extra income. 
(v)  Credit creation activities of the banks involve less time, while the 
lending activities of the non-bank intermediaries involve longer time. 
(vi)   Non-bank intermediaries can influence liquidity and create economic 
destabilisation in the economy when there are changes in the structure 
of portfolios held by the NBFIs or when financial claims on the NBFIs 
are increasing at the cost of banks’ demand deposits.  
(vii) The NBFIs can be advantageous due to their ability to lower transaction 
costs, quick decision-making capabilities, customer orientation and 
prompt provision of services. In terms of products and services offered, 
the NBFIs complement the banks. 
The distinction between the two has been highlighted by R. S. Sayers , by 
characterising the former as ‘ creators’ of credit , and the latter as mere 
‘purveyors’ of credit. This distinction arises from the fact that banks, which 
are part of the payment system, can create deposits and credit but the non-
banking institutions, which are not part of the payment system, can lend only 
out of the resources put at their disposal by the savers. To sum up, 


--- Page 34 ---
33 
Non-Bank Financial 
Intermediaries 
commercial banks and NBFIs both play a significant role in the economy’s 
progress. 
15.3  FUNCTIONS AND IMPORTANCE OF NBFIs 
NBFIs provide some or all of the following core financial services. These 
services are often offered in combinations.  These functions are: 
a) mobilization of savings,
b) channelization of funds into investment,
c) brokers of loanable funds,
d) stabilize the capital market, and
e) provide liquidity.
Some financial institutions provide payment services  by issuing claims that 
can be used in settling transactions. Liquidity is the ease with which an 
asset’s full market value can be realized once a decision to sell has been 
made. Financial institutions enhance liquidity through specialization and 
scale. Divisibility is the extent to which an asset can be traded in small 
denominations. Financial institutions break up large denomination (lumpy) 
claims and aggregate small denomination claims to meet the divisibility 
preferences of the community. Providing economies of scale in processing 
and assessing risks is an important role of financial institutions. Risk pooling 
is the extent to which an asset spreads the default risk of the underlying 
promises by pooling. By pooling assets, financial institutions have much 
more scope to pool risk in comparison to individuals.  
Importance of NBFIs : NBFIs can protect economies from financial shocks. 
Alan Greenspan has identified the role of NBFIs in strengthening an 
economy, as they provide “multiple alternatives to transform an economy’s 
savings into capital investment (which) act as backup facilities should the 
primary form of intermediation fail.” NBFIs play a range of roles that are not 
suitable for banks and through their provision of liquidity, divisibility, 
informational efficiencies, and risk pooling services, they broaden the 
spectrum of risks available to investors . In this way, they encourage and 
improve the efficiency of investment and savings. By providing a broader 
range of financial instruments, they can foster a risk management culture by 
attracting customers who are least able to bear risks and fill the gaps in 
financial services that otherwise occur in bank-based financial systems. 
The development of financial intermediaries contributes strongly to economic 
growth. That contribution is increased where intermediation is provided 
through a balanced combination of NBFIs and commercial banks – in 
particular, there is a strong correlation between the depth and activeness of 
non-banks and stock markets on the one hand, and economic development on 
the other. NBFIs have played an important role in the Indian financial system 
by complementing and competing with commercial banks, and by bringing 


--- Page 35 ---
 
 
34 
Financial Institutions efficiency and diversity into financial intermediation. NBFIs have evolved 
considerably in operations, heterogeneity, asset quality and profitability, and 
regulatory architecture. In India, they often play an important role because of 
their ability to: 
a)  reach out to inaccessible areas; and  
b)  act as not just complements but also substitutes to commercial banks 
when the banks are confronted with stricter regulatory constraints.  
Customers tend to find the non-banking entities convenient due to their 
quicker decision-making ability, prompt provision of services and expertise 
in niche segments. Apart from widening the ambit of and access to financial 
services, they also enhance the resilience of the financial system  by acting as 
backup institutions when banks come under stress. 
15.4 SIZE AND STRUCTURE OF NBFIs IN INDIA  
NBFIs are regulated by the Reserve Bank. They comprise of: 
1) Non-banking financial companies (NBFCs): They include government 
and private entities and play an important role in financial 
intermediation, including niche activities like micro-finance, factoring 
and FinTech.  
2) Housing Finance Companies (HFCs): They extend housing finance to 
individuals, cooperative societies and corporate bodies. 
3) All India financial institutions (AIFIs): The National Bank for 
Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD); the Export-Import 
Bank of India (EXIM Bank); the Small Industries Development Bank of 
India (SIDBI); the National Housing Bank (NHB); and National Bank 
for Financing Infrastructure and Development (NaBFID) are the apex 
financial institutions (FIs) which provide long-term funding to 
agriculture, foreign trade, small industries, housing finance companies 
and infrastructure, respectively. 
4) Primary dealers (PDs): Market makers in the government securities (G-
secs) market. 
Table 15.1: Structure and Size of NBFIs under RBI regulation 
S.No. Category of NBFIs Number of 
institutions 
(Provisional) 
1 All India Financial Institutions 5 
2 Non-banking Financial Companies 9480 
2a Deposit-taking NBFC (NBFCs-D) 26 
2b Non-Deposit taking NBFC (NBFCs-ND) 9330 


--- Page 36 ---
35 
Non-Bank Financial 
Intermediaries 
Non-deposit taking Systematically important 
NBFCs (NBFCs-ND-SI) 
507 
Other NBFCs-ND 8823 
2c Asset Reconstruction companies 27 
2d Housing Finance Companies 97 
3. Primary Dealers 21 
3a Bank PDs 14 
3b Standalone PDs 7 
Notes: *Number of NBFCs is at end September 2023, HFCs is at end March 2023 
Non-deposit taking NBFCs with asset size of 5 crores or more are called non-deposit-taking  
Systematically important NBFCs (NBFCs-ND-SI ) 
Source: RBI (2023). “Report on trend and progress of Banking in India-Non-Banking Financial 
Institutions” (December 2023) Retrieved from 
https://rbi.org.in/Scripts/PublicationsView.aspx?id=22352 
15.5 NON-BANKING FINANCIAL COMPANIES 
(NBFCs) 
According to RBI:  “a Non-Banking Financial Company (NBFC) is a 
company registered under the Companies Act, 1956 engaged in the business 
of loans and advances, acquisition of shares/stocks/bonds/debentures/ 
securities issued by Government or local authority or other marketable 
securities of a like nature, leasing, hire-purchase, insurance business, chit 
business but does not include any institution whose principal business is that 
of agriculture activity, industrial activity, purchase or sale of any goods 
(other than securities) or providing any services and sale/purchase/ 
construction of the immovable property. A non-banking institution which is a 
company and has principal business of receiving deposits under any scheme 
or arrangement in one lump sum or instalments by way of contributions or in 
any other manner is also a non-banking financial company (Residuary non-
banking company)”. 
NBFCs are an integral part of the Indian financial system. They include 
diverse entities, both government and private, and play an important role in 
credit intermediation, including niche activities like micro-finance, factoring 
and FinTech. Over the last decade, NBFCs have witnessed phenomenal 
growth. 
In 2023, the contribution of NBFCs to India’s gross domestic product (GDP) 
stood at 12.60% and accounted for almost 30% market share of the total non-
food credit in the country. (RBI, 2024). NBFCs have emerged as a crucial 
source of finance for a large segment of the population, including micro, 
small and medium enterprises (MSMEs), and economically unserved and 
underserved populations. From being around twelve per cent of the balance 
sheet size of commercial banks (2010), they are now more than a quarter of 


--- Page 37 ---
36 
Financial Institutions the size of commercial banks. While the development of a robust non-bank 
intermediation channel provides a good ‘spare tyre’ to the economy, 
unbridled growth fueled by a lighter regulatory framework can also lead to 
potential systemic risks. To counter that, RBI has introduced Scale Based 
Regulation (SBR) in October 2022. 
With the implementation of SBR, NBFCs have been segregated into four 
layers, namely, a Base Layer (NBFC-BL), a Middle Layer (NBFC-ML), an 
Upper Layer (NBFC-UL) and a Top Layer (NBFC-TL), based on size, 
activity, and the perceived level of riskiness. The top ten eligible NBFCs in 
terms of asset size shall always reside in the upper layer, along with other 
NBFCs that are identified on the basis of a set of parameters and scoring 
methodology. Accordingly, 15 NBFCs (including five HFCs) have been 
placed in the upper layer and are subjected to enhanced regulatory oversight. 
The top layer remains empty unless the Reserve Bank identifies a 
considerable rise in potential systemic risk from any NBFC in the upper 
layer, which will be moved to the top layer. We will discuss more about 
Scale based regulation in Sub-section 15.5.3. Under the new regulatory 
framework, NBFCs are classified into 11 categories based on activities 
undertaken. The categorization can be understood with the help of Table 
15.2. 
Table 15.2: Classification of NBFCs based on activities undertaken under 
the new regulatory framework 
Types of NBFCs Activity Layer 
NBFC-Investment and 
Credit Company 
(NBFC-ICC) 
Lending which supports 
productive/economic 
activities and acquisition of 
securities for investment.  
Any layer, depending on the 
parameters of the scale-
based regulatory frame-
work. 
NBFC-Infrastructure 
Finance Company (NBFC-
IFC) 
Infrastructure loans. Middle layer or Upper layer, 
as the case may be 
NBFC-Core Investment 
Company (CIC) 
Investment in equity shares, 
preference shares, debt, or 
loans of group companies. 
Middle layer or Upper layer, 
as the case may be 
NBFC-Infrastructure Debt 
Fund (NBFC-IDF) 
Facilitation of flow of long-
term debt post commence-
ment operations date (COD) 
infrastructure projects 
which have completed at 
least one year of satisfactory 
performance and finance 
toll operate transfer project 
as the direct lender 
Middle layer 


--- Page 38 ---
37 
NBFC-Micro Finance 
Institution (NBFC-MFI) 
Providing collateral-free 
small ticket loans to 
economically disadvantaged 
groups.  
Any layer, depending on the
parameters of the scale-
based regulatory framework 
NBFC-Factors Acquisition of receivables 
of an assignor or extending 
loans against the security 
interest of the receivables at 
a discount 
Any layer, depending on the 
parameters of the scale-
based regulatory framework 
NBFC-Non-Operative 
Financial Holding Company 
(NBFC-NOFHC) 
Facilitation of promoters/ 
promoter groups in setting 
up new banks 
Base layer 
Mortgage Guarantee 
Company (MGC) 
Undertaking of mortgage 
guarantee business. 
Any layer, depending on the 
parameters of the scale-
based regulatory framework 
NBFC-Account Aggregator 
(NBF-CAA) 
Collecting and providing 
information about a 
customer’s financial assets 
in a consolidated, organised, 
and retrievable manner to 
the customer or others as 
specified by the customer 
Base layer 
NBFC–Peer-to-Peer 
Lending Platform (NBFC-
P2P) 
Providing an online 
platform to bring lenders 
and borrowers together to 
help mobilise funds. 
Base layer 
NBFC-Housing Finance 
Company (NBFC-HFC) 
Financing for purchase/ 
construction/ reconstruction/ 
renovation/ repairs of 
residential dwelling units. 
Middle layer or Upper layer, 
as the case may be. 
Source: RBI (2023). “Report on trend and progress of Banking in India-Non-Banking Financial 
Institutions” (December 2023) Retrieved from 
https://rbi.org.in/Scripts/PublicationsView.aspx?id=22352 
15.5.1  Ownership Pattern of NBFCs 
The NBFC sector is dominated by non-deposit-taking systemically important 
NBFCs (NBFCs-ND-SI), with a share of 85.4 per cent in the total assets of 
the sector at the end of March 2023. This category mainly consists of non-
government companies, although a few large government companies have a 
significant share in assets. Deposit-taking NBFCs (NBFCs-D) accounted for 
14.6 per cent of the total assets of the NBFCs at end-March 2023. This 
category is dominated by non-government public limited companies, 
comprising 88 per cent of the total assets of NBFCs-D. As deposits accepted 


--- Page 39 ---
38 
Financial Institutions by NBFCs-D are not insured by the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee 
Corporation (DICGC), the Reserve Bank has adopted a cautionary approach, 
mandating that NBFCs-D with minimum investment grade rating for their 
fixed deposits shall accept fixed deposits from the public up to a limit of 1.5 
times of their NOF and for a tenure of 12 to 60 months only, with interest 
rates capped at 12.5 per cent. In May 2022, it was mandated that a minimum 
investment grade credit rating of ‘BBB-’ from any of the SEBI-registered 
credit rating agencies would be necessary for deposits of NBFCs. 
15.5.2  Financial Indicators of NBFCs 
In 2022-23, the aggregate income of NBFCs grew steeply, led by interest 
income. Fund-based resources have contributed around 90% of NBFCs total 
income. Expenditure was driven by interest expenses (around one-third of 
their total expenditure during 2022-23) and operating costs (around one-
fourth of the total). In 2022-23, net profits of NBFCs grew significantly 
because of a slower increase in expenditure as compared to income. This also 
indicates the operational efficiency of NBFCs. Along with net profits, key 
profitability indicators i.e., return on assets (ROA), return on equity (RoE) 
and net interest margin (NIM) improved during 2022-23. 
15.5.3  Regulatory Mechanism for NBFCs 
India had understood the sector’s relevance and the risks that it may pose, 
way back in the early 1960s, when, in 1963, Chapter III B dealing with 
regulation of the Non-Banking Financial Institutions was added to the 
Reserve Bank of India Act 1934. It recognised that non-banking ﬁnancial 
activity is an integral part of the financial system and complements 
commercial banking; only appropriate vigilance and due diligence will be 
needed to regulate this sector. 
Changes to the regulations concerning the NBFC sector over the last decade 
and a half have largely been incremental. However, in 2023, RBI released a 
detailed regulatory Structure under Scale Based Regulation. As we have 
discussed earlier also, the Regulatory structure for Non-Banking Financial 
Companies (NBFCs) comprises four layers based on their size, activity and 
perceived riskiness. NBFCs in the lowest layer are known as NBFCs-Base 
Layer (NBFCs-BL). NBFCs in the middle layer and upper layer are known as 
NBFCs-Middle Layer (NBFCs-ML) and NBFCs Upper Layer (NBFCs-UL), 
respectively. The Top Layer is ideally expected to be empty and is known as 
NBFCs-Top Layer (NBFCs-TL). 
The Base Layer comprise (a) non-deposit-taking NBFCs below the asset size 
of ₹1,000 crore and (b) NBFCs undertaking the following activities — 
(i) NBFC-Peer to Peer Lending Platform (NBFC-P2P), (ii) NBFC-Account 
Aggregator (NBFC-AA), (iii) Non-Operative Financial Holding Company 
(NOFHC) and (iv) NBFC not availing public funds and not having any 
customer interface. 


--- Page 40 ---
39 
Non-Bank Financial 
Intermediaries 
The Middle Layer consist of (a) all deposit-taking NBFCs (NBFCs-D), 
irrespective of asset size, (b) non-deposit-taking NBFCs with asset size of 
₹1,000 crore and above and (c) NBFCs undertaking the following activities 
(i) Standalone Primary Dealer (SPD), (ii) Infrastructure Debt Fund-Non-
Banking Financial Company (IDF-NBFC), (iii) Core Investment Company 
(CIC), (iv) Housing Finance Company (HFC) and (v) Non-Banking Financial 
Company-Infrastructure Finance Company (NBFC-IFC).  
Upper Layer : The Upper Layer comprise those NBFCs which are 
specifically identified by the Reserve Bank as warranting enhanced 
regulatory requirements based on a set of parameters and a specific scoring 
methodology. The top ten eligible NBFCs in terms of their asset size always 
reside in the upper layer, irrespective of any other factor.  
Top Layer:  The Top Layer will ideally remain empty. This layer can be 
populated if the Reserve Bank is of the opinion that there is a substantial 
increase in the potential systemic risk from specific NBFCs in the Upper 
Layer. Such NBFCs shall move to the Top Layer from the Upper Layer.  
As the regulatory structure envisages scale-based as well as activity-based 
regulation, the following prescription applies with respect to the NBFCs.  
 NBFC-P2P, NBFC-AA, NOFHC and NBFC not availing public funds
and not having any customer interface always remain in the Base Layer
of the regulatory structure.
 NBFC-D, NBFC-CIC, NBFC-IFC and HFC are included in the Middle
Layer or the Upper Layer (and not in the Base layer), as the case may be.
 SPD and IDF-NBFC always remain in the Middle Layer.
 The remaining NBFCs, viz., NBFC-Investment and Credit Companies
(NBFC-ICCs), NBFC-Micro Finance Institutions (NBFC-MFIs), NBFC-
Factors and Mortgage Guarantee Companies (MGCs) could lie in any of
the layers of the regulatory structure depending on the parameters of the
scale based regulatory framework.
 Government-owned NBFCs are placed in the Base Layer or Middle
Layer, as the case may be.
 Multiple NBFCs in a Group - Classification in Middle Layer. NBFCs
that are part of a common Group or are floated by a common set of
promoters are not viewed on a standalone basis. The total assets of all the
NBFCs in a Group are consolidated to determine the threshold for their
classification in the Middle Layer. If the consolidated asset size of the
NBFCs in the Group is ₹1000 crore and above, then each NBFC-ICC,
NBFC-MFI, NBFC Factor and NBFC-MGC lying in the Group are
classified as an NBFC in the Middle Layer and consequently, regulations
as applicable to the Middle Layer shall are applicable to them. However,
NBFC-D, within the Group, is also governed under the Non-Banking
