--- Page 71 ---
 
 
70 
Financial Institutions 16.9 LET US SUM UP 
SEBI is a statutory regulatory body that was established by the Government 
of India in 1992 to protect the interests of investors investing in securities 
along with regulating the securities market. SEBI regulates the stock market 
and how mutual funds function. It promotes the development of the securities 
market and regulates the business. SEBI’s objectives are to fulfil the needs of 
issuers, investors and intermediaries. 
The governance of SEBI is entrusted to the SEBI board which consists of a 
chairman and several other full-time and part-time members. The chairman is 
nominated by the union government. The others include two members from 
the finance ministry, one member from the Reserve Bank of India and five 
other members are also nominated by the Centre. Further, a Securities 
Appellate Tribunal (SAT) has been constituted to protect the interest of 
entities that feel aggrieved by SEBI’s decision. SAT consists of a presiding 
officer and two other members. 
SEBI has three functions rolled into one body: quasi-legislative, quasi-
judicial and quasi-executive. It drafts regulations in its legislative capacity, it 
conducts investigation and enforcement action in its executive function and it 
passes rulings and orders in its judicial capacity. 
SEBI has introduced numerous measures to improve the efficiency of the 
capital market in India. By improving market efficiency, increasing 
transparency, and preventing unfair trade practices, SEBI has succeeded in 
raising the standard of the Indian capital market to the international level. 
Underlying this progress in the securities market have been several 
noteworthy institutional developments. SEBI has the power to provide licenses 
to dealers and brokers of the capital market. On several occasions, SEBI has 
taken action against front-running. Over the years, SEBI has done a good job 
of rewriting the rules and regulations to ensure India’s stock markets and the 
ecosystem around it function efficiently. But some loopholes remained.  
SEBI plays an important role in the following ways: 
i) Making rules for regulating the stock exchange,  
ii) Providing licenses to dealers and brokers,  
iii) Regulating mergers, acquisitions and takeovers of the companies, and  
iv) Auditing the performance of the stock market. 
16.10  KEY WORDS 
Application Supported : 
by Blocked Amount 
(ASBA) facility 
Where investor funds remain blocked in their bank 
accounts instead of being passed to the broker 
until the execution of the purchase order. 
Fintech                          : New technology that seeks to improve and 
automate the delivery and use of financial 
services.  


--- Page 72 ---
71 
SEBI Forensic audit  :  It involves a deep examination of all sorts of 
records within an organisation to identify possible 
unethical or criminal behaviour. 
Front-running  :
 occurs when somebody utilises insider knowledge 
of planned future institutional transactions to take 
a position on their account before the institutional 
orders are placed. 
Index providers  :
 Index providers are those institutions that 
formulate and manage indices. The most 
prominent indices in India are the Nifty50 by NSE 
Indices, and Sensex provided by a venture of S&P 
Dow Jones Indices and BSE Lied. 
Insider trading  :
 Making profits by buying or selling a publicly 
traded company’s stock by someone (usually an 
insider) with non-public, material information 
about that company. 
Short selling  :
 Short-selling is an investment strategy in which a 
trader speculates on the decline of a stock price 
using complex financial products. 
Side letters  :  Side letters are agreements between a particular 
investor and the investment manager that provide 
the specific investor with different or preferential 
terms than those outlined in the fund’s governing 
documents, available to other investors. 
Total expense ratio     : 
(TER) 
It is the amount that Mutual Funds proportionately 
charge investors for the expense incurred on a 
scheme. 
16.11  SOME USEFUL BOOKS AND REFERENCES 
Basu, Debashis (2022, December 04). Finfluencers: SEBI’s lost battle, 
Business Standard , https://www.business-standard.com/article/opinion/ 
finfluencers-SEBI-s-lost-battle-122120400934_1.html 
Dayal, Gaurav and Sawhney, Shylla (2022, May 25). Taking ESG reporting 
to the next level, The Hindu Business Line,  
https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/todays-paper/tp-opinion/taking-esg-
reporting-to-the-next-level/article65458396.ece 
Kumar, K Ram and Iyengar, Suresh P. (2023, February 11). SEBI plans a 
forensic audit of all mutual funds, The Hindu Business Line, 
https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/markets/SEBI-plans-forensic-audit-
of-all-mutual-funds/article66496911.ece 


--- Page 73 ---
 
 
72 
Financial Institutions Muneer, M. and Ward, Ralph (2023, March 24). The Adani affair revealed 
gaping holes in governance, Live mint,  
https://www.livemint.com/opinion/columns/the-adani-affair-revealed-gaping-
holes-in-governance-11679593117188.html 
Nair, CKG and Sahoo, MS (2022, May 30). It’s time for regulatory algos, 
The Hindu Business Line , https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/todays-
paper/tp-opinion/its-time-for-regulatory-algos/article65474445.ece 
Sabarinathan, G (2010): Securities and Exchange Board of India and the 
Regulation of the Indian Securities Market, Working Paper no. 309, Indian 
Institute of Management (IIM), Bangalore, https://www.iimb.ac.in/node/1898 
Sahoo, M S and Agarwal, Sumit (2022, June 13). Standardising regulatory 
prescriptions, Business Standard , https://www.business-standard.com/ 
article/opinion/standardising-regulatory-prescriptions-122061301247_1.html 
Saravanan, Palanisamy and Banerjee, Sumit (2023, January 03). Index 
providers need to be regulated, The Hindu Business Line,  
https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/opinion/index-providers-need-to-be-
regulated/article66334895.ece 
Shah, Palak (2023, February 06). Aftermath of Adani issue. SEBI gets strict 
on beneficial owners hiding behind FPIs, The Hindu Business Lines , 
https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/markets/SEBI-gets-strict-on-
beneficial-owners-hiding-behind-fpis/article66478394.ece 
16.12 ANSWER/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES 
Check Your Progress 1  
1) SEBI is a market regulator officially established in the year 1988 and 
given autonomous and statutory powers in 1992 to protect the interests of 
investors in the securities market. It also regulates the functioning of the 
stock market. 
2) Regulation of Stock Exchanges, investor protection,  preventing 
fraudulent practices, developing a code of conduct, and ensuring 
investor’s education. 
3) The failure of the securities market could have a ripple effect on the rest 
of the financial system as a whole. Safeguarding investors' interest will 
also ensure confidence in the stock market and ultimately growth of the 
stock market. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) Listing Obligations and Disclosure Requirements for Prevention 
of Fraud and Unfair Trade Practices Rules, shield retail investors 
from fraud, advanced and graded surveillance mechanisms. 


--- Page 74 ---
73 
SEBI 2) Refer to Section 16.4
3) Securities Appellate Tribunal (SAT) has been constituted to protect the
interest of entities that feel aggrieved by SEBI’s decision. SAT consists
of a presiding officer and two other members.
4) Refer to Sub-section 16.4.2
Check Your Progress 3 
1) The massive size of illegal businesses, financial influencers, money
laundering through FII, and dealing with hi-tech innovative products.
2) SEBI is working to build internal capacity and skillsets in efficiently
mining surveillance data and building a convincing evidence trail.
3) Accounting rule writing and administration system.
4) Investors focus on sustainability investing, shifting from finance-centric
investment models to more socially and environmentally responsible
long-term investing trends. ESG has gained significant traction globally
which focuses on non-financial factors as a metric for guiding
investment decisions.
16.13  TERMINAL EXERCISES 
1) ‘To promote orderly and healthy growth of securities market and
protection of investors, SEBI was set up’. With reference to this
statement, describe the working of SEBI.
2) How will you explain the success of SEBI in regulating the Indian capital
market since its inception? Amplify your answer.
3) ‘SEBI needs to reinvent itself and its regulations to control market
manipulation in the digital era’. Explain this statement and do you think
SEBI’s regulations need to be rewritten?
4) Examine how SEBI has been responsive to the needs of three groups,
which constitute the market: the issuers, the investors, and the
intermediaries.
5) How is SEBI a quasi-legislative, quasi-executive and quasi-judicial
organisation? Explain with examples.
6) What are the multiple perspectives from which the rationale for
establishing SEBI was made? Give a reason for your answer.


--- Page 75 ---
 
 
74 
Financial Institutions UNIT 17 OTHER FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
AND REGULATIONS  
Structure 
17.0 Objectives  
17.1   Introduction 
17.2 Nature and Importance of Other Financial Institutions (OFIs) 
17.3   Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) 
 17.3.1  SIDBI’s Primary Functions  
17.3.2  Finance Facilities Offered by SIDBI 
17.3.3  Importance of SIDBI  
17.4    Export-Import Bank of India (EXIM Bank)  
17.4.1  Financing Functions and Facilities 
17.5  National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) 
17.6  Infrastructure Finance 
17.7   National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development  
(NaBFID) 
17.8  India Infrastructure Finance Company Ltd (IIFCL) 
17.9 Infrastructure Leasing & Financial Services Limited (IL&FS) 
17.10  Power Finance Corporation Ltd. ( PFC) 
17.11  Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd. ( REC) 
17.12  National Housing Bank (NHB) 
17.13  Tourism Finance Corporation of India (TFCI)   
17.14  Insurance Sector 
             17.14.1  Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC) 
             17.14.2  General Insurance Companies (Non-life Insurance) 
17.15  Mutual Funds 
17.16   Let Us Sum Up  
17.17  Key Words 
17.18  Some Useful Books/References  
17.19 Answer/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises   
17.20 Terminal Questions  
17.0  OBJECTIVES 
After completing this unit, you will be able to: 
 highlight the heterogeneity of other financial institutions (OFIs) 
institutions as they serve specific sectors of the economy; 
 


--- Page 76 ---
 
 
75 
Other Financial 
Institutions and 
Regulations 
 describe functions of EXIM Bank, SIDBI, NABARD; 
 discuss role of NaBFID, IIFCL and IL&FS in financing infrastructure 
projects; 
 point out the importance of investment institutions like LIC and Non-
life insurance institutions;  
 explain the significance of TFCI in promoting tourism in the country; 
and  
 narrate the importance of mutual funds in the financial system.  
17.1  INTRODUCTION 
As discussed in Unit 2, financial intermediation in India is conducted by a 
wide range of financial institutions. The Reserve Bank of India is the apex 
institution of the financial system. However, there are other financial 
institutions (OFIs) also like NaBFID, NABARD, SIDBI, EXIM Bank, 
NHB etc. which play a very important role in regulating different aspects 
of the financial system. This unit examines the structure and evolution of 
the OFIs over the past six decades. The unit concentrates on the ‘ organized ’ 
segment of the OFIs which includes sector-specific financial institutions, 
and investment institutions e.g., insurance companies (life and non-life) and 
mutual funds. 
17.2 NATURE AND IMPORTANCE OF OTHER 
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS (OFIs) 
In India’s ‘organised’ sector there exists a wide range of other financial 
institutions. The role of OFIs is to recognise the gaps in institutions and 
markets in the financial sector and act as a gap-filler. OFIs can be classified 
into two broad categories of institutions based on their area of operation: 
Sector-specific financial institutions  and Investment Institutions. The various 
measures of developmental finance indicate that the OFI are playing an 
increasingly active role in the transfer of funds from the surplus to the deficit 
sectors in the economy. These financial institutions obtain their resources 
partly from the Government and partly as loans or refinancing from the capital 
market. The assistance provided by these institutions is quantitatively 
important. The Government used these institutions for the achievements in 
planning and development of the nation as a whole. The structure and 
evolution of OFIs are aimed at ensuring the flow of finance in desired 
directions and in particular to priority areas of development such as 
infrastructure, agriculture, small industries and backward areas; thus, 
assisting in the accomplishment of desired goals.  
OFIs can be classified into two broad categories of institutions as per their 
area of operation: 


--- Page 77 ---
 
 
76 
Financial Institutions 1) Sector-specific financial institutions: Small Industries Development 
Bank of India (SIDBI); Export-Import Bank of India (EXIM Bank); 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD); 
National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development  
(NaBFID), India Infrastructure Finance Company Ltd. (IIFCL), 
Infrastructure Leasing & Financial Services (IL&FS); National 
Housing Bank (NHB); Power Finance Corporation (PFC); Rural 
Electrification Corporation (REC); Tourism Finance Corporation of 
India (TFCI). 
2) Investment Institutions: Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC), 
General Insurance Companies and Mutual Funds. 
17.3   SMALL INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT 
BANK OF INDIA (SIDBI) 
SIDBI is the primary financial institution for promoting, developing and 
financing the MSME (Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise) sector and 
coordination of the functions of the various institutions engaged in similar 
activities. It is an independent financial institution established on 2 nd April 
1990 under the Small Industries Development Bank of India Act 1989 as a 
subsidiary of the Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI turned into a 
commercial bank as IDBI Bank). Currently, The GoI and 22 other 
PSBs/FIs/Insurance Companies, owned or under the authority of the Central 
Government, hold shares of the IDBI [GoI (20.85%), SBI (15.65%), LIC 
(13.33%), NABARD (9.36%), PNB (5.96%), others (34.85%)].  SIDBI acts as 
the principal financial institution for the promotion, financing and 
development of the MSMEs sector and also coordinates the functions of the 
institutions engaged in similar activities. SIDBI’s Head Office is in Lucknow. 
17.3.1  SIDBI’s Primary Functions 
SIDBI’s primary functions are:  
i) Providing finance for the growth and development of micro, small and 
medium-scale enterprises (MSMEs). SIDBI also promotes cleaner 
production and energy efficiency. It helps MSMEs in acquiring the funds 
they require to grow, market, develop and commercialise their 
technologies and innovative products.  
ii) Refinancing loans and advances provided by the existing lending 
institutions to small-scale units.  
iii) The SIDBI provides several schemes and also offers financial services 
and products for meeting the individual requirements of various 
businesses. 


--- Page 78 ---
 
 
77 
Other Financial 
Institutions and 
Regulations 
17.3.2  Finance Facilities Offered by SIDBI 
It offers the following facilities to its customers: 
1) Direct finance  offers working capital assistance, term loan assistance, 
foreign currency loans, support against receivables, equity support, energy 
saving schemes for the MSME sector, etc. 
2) Indirect finance offers indirect assistance by providing refinance to PLIs 
(Primary Lending Institutions), comprising commercial banks, State Level 
Financial Institutions, etc. with an extensive branch network across the 
country. The key objective of the refinancing scheme is to raise the 
resource position of Primary Lending Institutions that would ultimately 
enable the flow of credit to the MSME sector i.e. microfinance institutions.  
3) It discounts and rediscounts bills. 
4) The Ministry of MSMEs and SIDBI, established a trust named Credit 
Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) to 
implement the Credit Guarantee Scheme (CGS). The scheme was formally 
launched on August 30, 2000. 
17.3.3  Importance of SIDBI  
As an apex institution, SIDBI is playing a proactive role in reaching out to 
MSMEs by extending financial and developmental support services to 
MSMEs. Its importance can be described as follows: 
i) It helps in expanding marketing channels for the products of MSMEs 
both in the domestic as well as international markets. 
ii) It offers services like factoring, leasing etc. to the industrial concerns in 
the MSME sector. 
iii) It promotes employment-oriented industries, particularly in semi-urban 
areas for creating employment opportunities and thus checking 
relocation of people to the urban areas. 
iv) It also initiates steps for modernisation and technological up-gradation 
of current units. 
v) Policies are framed for customised loans as per the requirements of 
businesses. If the requirement doesn’t fall into the ordinary and usual 
category, SIDBI would assist funding in the right way. Credit and loans 
are modified as per the size of the business as well. Its processes and rate 
structure are transparent. There aren't any hidden charges.  
vi) It offers various schemes which have concessional interest rates and 
comfortable terms. It has a tie-up with several banks and financial 
institutions the world over e.g. World Bank and the Japan International 
Cooperation Agency and could offer concessional interest rates.  


--- Page 79 ---
 
 
78 
Financial Institutions vii) The SIDBI formally institutionalized the micro-credit programme by 
setting up a specialized department called SIDBI Foundation for Micro 
Credit (SFMC) in 1999 as the “Institutional Answer” to the huge unmet 
demand for microfinance. Its microfinance programme is perceived as a 
“Credit Plus” programme and hence, does not restrict itself to funding 
alone. But also provide capacity-building grants as well.  
viii) SIDBI extends Nodal Agency services to the Government of India for 
schemes sponsored by various Ministries to encourage the 
implementation of modernisation and technology upgradation projects 
by manufacturing units in the MSME sector. 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) Discuss the nature and importance of OFIs.  
 ……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
2) Explain the financing activities of SIDBI. 
 ……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
3) Describe its importance in financing MSMEs.  
 ……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
17.4  EXPORT-IMPORT BANK OF INDIA (EXIM 
BANK)  
Export-Import Bank of India (EXIM Bank) was established on January 1, 
1982, under the EXIM Bank of India Act 1981 to provide financial assistance 
to exporters and importers, and function as the principal financial institution 
for co-ordinating the working of institutions engaged in financing export and 
import of goods and services to promote the country’s international trade and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. Its headquarters is in 
Mumbai. Since its inception, it has been the principal financial institution in 
the country for financing project exports and exports on deferred credit terms. 
Exim Bank has two broad business streams:     
i) the traditional export finance typical of export credit agencies around the 
world, and  


--- Page 80 ---
 
 
79 
Other Financial 
Institutions and 
Regulations 
ii) financing of export-oriented units (export capability creation), which are 
non-traditional for export credit agencies.  
17.4.1  Financing Functions and Facilities 
Exim Bank extends funded and non-funded facilities for overseas turnkey 
projects, civil construction contracts, technical and consultancy service 
contracts as well as supplies. Under powers delegated vide the PEM, it 
provides post-award clearance for project export contracts valued up to USD 
100 million. It also plays the role of a financier and provides funded and non-
funded support for project export contracts of Indian Entities. The bank lays 
special emphasis on the extension of Lines of Credit (LOCs) to overseas 
entities, national governments, regional financial institutions and Commercial 
Banks. A Line of Credit (LoC) is a financing mechanism through which Exim 
Bank extends support for the export of projects, equipment, goods and services 
from India. LOC provides a safe mode of non-recourse financing option for 
Indian exporters to enter new export markets or expand business in existing 
export markets without any payment risk from overseas importers. Exim Bank 
extends LoCs on its own and also at the behest and with the support of the 
Government of India.  
EXIM Bank provides financing facilities for Indian companies executing 
contracts overseas in the form of pre-shipment credit, supplier’s credit, export 
of projects, consultancy, technological services, and guarantee facilities. 
Similarly, for overseas entities financing takes the form of buyer’s credit. In 
addition to these, it extends export credit to export-oriented units, including 
research and development (R&D) finance. It provides working capital finance 
by way of pre-shipment credit and post-shipment credit.  
Finance for MSMEs: There are services that Exim Bank offers to support Small 
and Medium Enterprises.  It has arranged for a credit line from the Asian 
Development Bank (ADB) for providing foreign currency term loans to the 
MSME borrowers in certain specific lagging states of India, viz. Assam, 
Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Rajasthan 
and Uttarakhand. In the MSME segment, Exim Bank has introduced a 
Programme specifically for financing the Creative Economy. The Creative 
Industries are those industries which have their origin in individual creativity, 
skill and talent and which have a potential for wealth and Job creation through 
the generation and exploitation of intellectual property viz., Advertising, 
Architecture, Art and Antiques Market, Crafts, Design, Designer Fashion, Film 
and Video, Interactive Leisure Software, Music, Performing Arts, Publishing, 
Software and Computer Services, Television and Radio etc. The EXIM Bank 
extends financial support to promote grassroots initiatives/technologies, 
particularly those having export potential.  
The EXIM Bank has fostered a network of alliances and institutional linkages 
with multilateral agencies, export credit agencies, banks and financial 
