--- Page 51 ---
50 
Financial Institutions UNIT 16 SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE 
BOARD OF INDIA (SEBI) 
Structure 
16.0  Objectives 
16.1  Introduction 
16.2 Concept and Act of SEBI 
16.2.1  Evolution of SEBI and Act of 1992 
16.2.2  Rationale for the Establishment of SEBI 
16.3 Objectives and Functions of SEBI 
16.3.1  Functions of SEBI 
16.4  Structure of SEBI 
16.4.1  Authority and Power of SEBI 
16.4.2  Mutual Fund Regulations by SEBI 
16.5 Working of SEBI 
16.6 Challenges before SEBI 
16.7 Evaluation of SEBI’s Performance 
16.8 Suggestions for Making SEBI Effective 
16.9     Let Us Sum Up 
16.10   Key Words 
16.11   Some Useful Books and References 
16.12 Answer/Hints to Check Your Progress Exercises 
16.13   Terminal Exercises 
16.0  OBJECTIVES  
After going through this unit, you will be able to: 
 describe SEBI;
 explain SEBI’s objective and functions;
 highlight the rationale for SEBI;
 describe the working of SEBI as a capital market regulator;
 evaluate the performance of SEBI;
 examine the challenges before SEBI; and
 suggest measures for improving SEBI’s effectiveness.


--- Page 52 ---
51 
SEBI 16.1  INTRODUCTION 
India’s approach to ‘ market regulation' has evolved keeping systemic 
imperatives and institutional prudence at the centre. Legislative and 
regulatory action over the years has started to change things for the better. 
The changing regulatory environment has also enabled foreign institutional 
investors steeped in a more robust activism culture. Shareholder activism 
may have gained ground, but it still has a distance to go.  
There is increasing evidence that law and regulations are important for the 
financial markets. Financial markets have an important relationship with 
economic development. Regulation has been acknowledged to enable the 
orderly functioning of the securities market. In India, because of the 
securities fraud, there was a sense of urgency to establish a capital market 
regulator. Keeping this in mind, Securities and Exchange Board of India 
(SEBI) was officially established in 1988 and given autonomous and 
statutory powers in 1992 after the SEBI Act 1992 was passed by the Indian 
Parliament. The role of SEBI was defined to be responsive to the needs of 
three groups, which constitute the market: the issuers, the investors, and the 
intermediaries. 
SEBI is primarily set up to protect the interests of investors in the securities 
market. It plays an important role in regulating the Indian capital market. Since its 
establishment in 1992 as a statutory regulatory body, it has been doing a 
commendable job of protecting the interests of investors. SEBI provides a 
platform for stockbrokers, sub-brokers, portfolio managers, investment 
advisers, share transfer agents, bankers, merchant bankers, trustees of trust 
deeds, registrars, underwriters, and other associated people to register and 
regulate work. 
SEBI aims to meet the needs of issuers, investors, and intermediates involved 
in the securities market. SEBI is a quasi-legislative and quasi-judicial 
organisation with the authority to create rules, conduct investigations, issue 
decisions, and levy penalties. It also regulates the functioning of the stock 
market. The head office of SEBI is in Mumbai. Having this backdrop, this 
unit will discuss various aspects of SEBI in terms of its concept, nature, 
rationale for its formation, objectives, functions and powers, structure of 
governance, working, challenges, evaluation of its working and suggestions 
for going forward.       
16.2 CONCEPT AND ACT OF SEBI 
In 1988, SEBI was founded as a non-statutory organization with the 
responsibility of monitoring stock market activity. The SEBI Act of 1992 
made SEBI a statutory body with independent jurisdiction and was 
established on the 12 th of April, 1992.  The Act gave SEBI the power to 
oversee and actively enforce regulations governing the capital markets. It 
monitors and regulates the Indian capital and securities market while 
ensuring the protection of the interests of the investors, formulating 
regulations and guidelines.  


--- Page 53 ---
52 
Financial Institutions 16.2.1  Evolution of SEBI and Act of 1992 
Before SEBI came into existence, the Controller of Capital Issues (CCI) was 
the regulatory authority. The capital market was regulated by the Capital 
Issue (Contract) Act, of 1947. Later on, when the Controller of Capital Issues 
was abolished, SEBI was given the responsibility of a market regulator. With 
the abolition of CCI, companies do not require prior permission from the 
government to access the capital markets. Companies are free to approach the 
capital markets without prior government permission, subject to getting offer 
documents cleared by SEBI. Controls over price and premium fixation have 
also been removed and most issuing companies are free to fix the price of 
their securities for the public as well as rights issues. 
In 1988, SEBI was constituted as the regulator of capital markets in India. 
Initially, SEBI was a non-statutory body without any statutory power. The 
SEBI was established as a statutory entity by an ordinance on January 30, 
1992. The ordinance was passed by both houses of Parliament on April 1, 
1992, although the legislation is deemed to have taken effect from the day the 
ordinance was issued. SEBI is a body having a separate legal existence and 
perpetual succession. In 1995, the SEBI was given additional statutory power 
through an amendment to the SEBI Act of 1992.  
SEBI was established in the same manner as the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) of the United States, which was established under the 
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 to oversee the securities market and to 
prevent unfair trade activities on the stock exchange. The SEBI Act 
1992 covers the following areas: 
i) Composition and actions of the SEBI Board members
ii) Powers and Functions of the Board
iii) Fund sources of SEBI, as in grants made available by the Union
Government
iv) Rules on Penalties and Legal Pathways
v) Definition of the judicial authority of SEBI
vi) The extent of powers of the Union Government to supersede SEBI.
SEBI also has to adhere to a list of SEBI guidelines, about areas such as: 
i) Employee Stock Option Schemes.
ii) Disclosure and Investor Protection norms.
iii) Legal Proceedings.
iv) Anti-money laundering norms.
v) Listing and delisting of securities.
vi) Opening of trading terminals overseas.


--- Page 54 ---
53 
SEBI Listing Obligations and Disclosure Requirements (LODR) regulations for 
SEBI form one of the most important mandates. The new regulation in 2015 
on LODR intends to consolidate all the previous amendments into one single 
document, making the document uniform across different segments of the 
capital market. The SEBI (LODR) Regulations, 2015 entails the following: 
i) Disclosures and obligations that have to be acknowledged by the
compliance officers of the listed company.
ii) Listing down obligations uniform to all listed companies.
iii) Distinct obligations for certain types of securities.
iv) Segregating initial issuance and post-IPO norms.
v) Communication of the companies’ fundraising activities.
vi) Establishing timelines for notifying the exchanges of certain events.
vii) Bringing MSMEs under the ambit of the SEBI (LODR) Regulations.
16.2.2  Rationale for the Establishment of SEBI 
Broadly, financial markets may be considered to comprise the securities 
markets and financial institutions such as banks and non-banking finance 
companies (NBFCs). There are multiple perspectives from which the 
rationale for regulation may be examined. SEBI was set up with the main 
purpose of keeping a check on malpractices and protecting the interests of 
investors. It was set up to meet the needs of the following three groups, 
which constitute the market:   
i) For issuers: it provides a marketplace in which they can raise finance
fairly and easily.
ii) For investors: it provides protection and supply of accurate and correct
information.
iii) For intermediaries: it provides a competitive professional market.
The purpose of SEBI is to maintain stable and efficient markets by creating 
and enforcing regulations in the marketplace.  It is a vital component in 
improving the quality of the financial markets in India, both by attracting 
foreign investors and protecting Indian investors. SEBI has an explicit 
mandate to develop securities markets.  Market participants are issuers and 
issuances, investors, intermediaries, stock exchange, clearing corporations 
and depositories.  
According to G. Sabarinathan,  “The Indian securities market is a complex 
network of a host of economic agents. When they come together to execute a 
transaction they are tied together through a web of regulations, in addition to 
their commercial interconnectedness. Even the conduct of those that are not 
directly governed by securities regulations is indirectly influenced through 


--- Page 55 ---
54 
Financial Institutions their contractual obligations to other regulated intermediaries and/or the 
regulation on the outcome of the service they provide”.   
The government and the community at large would expect that the securities 
market function as an important, stable and safe centre piece of the financial 
system, coexisting in a symbiotic relationship with the rest of the financial 
system. “The failure of the securities market could have a ripple effect on the 
rest of the financial system as a whole”. Stock exchanges expect a stable, 
consistent and transparent policy regime that would enable them to engage in 
the activity of providing liquidity to investors by innovating, competing and 
responding to emerging developments in the financial sector. In short, SEBI 
plays an important role in regulating and protecting the interests of all the 
players operating in the Indian capital market by enforcing various rules and 
regulations.  
16.3 OBJECTIVES AND FUNCTIONS OF SEBI  
The objective of the SEBI is to provide an environment that paves the way 
for the mobilisation and allocation of resources. It provides practices, 
framework and infrastructure to meet the growing demand. The following are 
the primary objectives of the SEBI: 
i) Regulation of Stock Exchanges : SEBI regulates the activities of stock
exchanges so that efficient services may be provided to all the parties
operating there.
ii) Investor Protection : This is one of the most important objectives of
setting up SEBI. It involves protecting the interests of investors by
providing guidance and ensuring that the investment is safe.
iii) Preventing fraudulent practices and malpractices which are related to
trading and regulation.
iv) Developing a code of conduct for financial intermediaries such as
underwriters, brokers, and other intermediaries.
v) Ensuring investor’s education about the intermediaries of securities
markets and enhancing their knowledge.
vi) Taking care of research and development to ensure the securities market
is efficient at all times.
SEBI achieves its objectives through proactive supervision and policy 
measures. The realisation of statutory objectives in the securities market 
requires absolute clarity of statutory provisions. 
16.3.1  Functions of SEBI 
SEBI is a statutory body and a market regulator, its functions are categorised 
under protective, regulatory and developmental functions. These are 
discussed as follows: 


--- Page 56 ---
55 
SEBI a) Protective Functions : The protective function relates to the role that
SEBI plays in protecting the interests of investors and also that of
other financial participants. This function includes the following
activities:
i) Prohibits insider trading: Insider trading means buying or
selling of the securities by the insiders of a company, which
includes the directors, employees and promoters. To prevent
such trading SEBI has barred the companies from purchasing
their shares from the secondary market.
ii) Check price rigging: Price rigging causes unnatural
fluctuations in the price of securities by either increasing or
decreasing the market price of the stocks which leads to
unexpected losses for the investors. SEBI maintains a very
close watch to prevent such malpractices.
iv) Promoting fair practices: SEBI promotes fair trade practices
and works towards prohibiting insider trading, i.e. fraudulent
and unfair trade practices related to the securities market.
iv) Financial education: SEBI educates the investors by
conducting online and offline sessions that provide information
related to market insights and also on money management. It
takes efforts to educate the investors regarding ways to
evaluate the investment options better.
v) Regulates the operations of depositories, participants,
custodians of securities, foreign portfolio investors, and credit
rating agencies.
b) Regulatory Functions: Regulatory functions involve a framework
of rules and regulations for the financial intermediaries along with
corporates that help in the efficient management of the market. The
following are some of the regulatory functions:
i) SEBI has defined the rules and regulations and formed
guidelines and codes of conduct that should be followed by the
corporates as well as the financial intermediaries.
ii) Monitors substantial acquisitions of shares and take-over of
companies,
iii) Conducting inquiries and audits of stock exchanges.
iv) Regulates the working of stock brokers, merchant brokers etc.
It regulates and registers the workings of share transfer agents,
stockbrokers, merchant bankers, trustees, and others who are
linked with the stock exchange.
v) Regulates and registers the mutual funds as well.


--- Page 57 ---
56 
Financial Institutions c) Developmental Functions:  Developmental function refers to the
steps taken by SEBI to provide the investors with knowledge of the
trading and how the market functions. The following activities are
included:
i) Training of intermediaries who are a part of the security
market.
ii) Introduction of trading through electronic means or the internet
with the help of registered stock brokers.
iii) By making the underwriting an optional system to reduce the
cost of the issue.
iv) Promotes the development of the securities market and
business.
v) Enables a competitive professional market for intermediaries.
Several of the functions that SEBI discharges are based on powers that it 
draws from the Securities Contract Regulation (SCR) Act, 1956 and the rules 
made thereunder. Two amendments in 1995 and 1999 brought about several 
important changes to the scope and the administration of the SCR Act, 
resulting in the current form of the law (Sabarinathan, 2010). 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) What is SEBI? Why was it established?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
2) Explain the role and objectives of SEBI.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
3) Why is there stress on protecting the interest of investors?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
16.4 STRUCTURE OF SEBI 
SEBI is run by its board of members. The board comprises of nine members. 
SEBI has a corporate framework comprising various departments each 
managed by a department head. The headquarters of SEBI is situated in 


--- Page 58 ---
57 
SEBI Bandra Kurla Complex, Mumbai and the regional offices are located in 
Ahmedabad, Kolkata, Chennai and Delhi. It has also opened local offices in 
Jaipur, Bengaluru, Guwahati, Bhubaneshwar, Patna, Kochi, and 
Chandigarh. 
The hierarchical structure of SEBI consists of the following: 
i) The chairman of SEBI is nominated by the Union Government of India.
ii) Two officers from the Union Ministry of Finance.
iii) One member is from the Reserve Bank of India.
iv) The remaining 5 members are nominated by the Union Government of
India out of them at least 3 are whole-time members.
Allocation of work among Chairman and Board members : The Chairman of 
SEBI, in addition to overseeing the Board, also looks over the 
Communications, Vigilance, and Internal Inspection Department. There are 
four full-time members in the organizational structure. The whole-time 
members are allocated several departments that they have to oversee. Each 
department is individually headed by an executive director. The executive 
directors report to specific whole-time members. 
The organizational structure of SEBI consists of various departments, such as 
Foreign Portfolio Investors and Custodians (FPI&C), Corporation Finance 
Department (CFD), Information Technology Department (ITD), Department 
of Economic and Policy Analysis (DEPA-I, II, & III), Investment 
Management Department, Legal Affair Department, Treasury and Accounts 
Divisions (T&A), and National Institute of Securities Market (NISM). 
SEBI also appoints various committees, whenever required to look into the 
pressing issues of that time. These committees can only advise SEBI but they 
cannot force SEBI to take action on their advice.  
16.4.1  Authority and Power of SEBI 
SEBI has broad powers to carry out the goals of the SEBI Act of 1992. It has 
the authority to take both preventative and punitive actions to safeguard 
investors and improve the securities market. Circulars, instructions, and press 
releases are examples of such initiatives. Furthermore, SEBI is in charge of 
overseeing all Asset Management Companies (AMCs) registration. It is the 
primary authority when it comes to controlling, supervising, and assessing 
the performance of investment managers. It also has a procedure for 
resolving complaints and other concerns about asset managers. 
SEBI has the power to regulate and perform functions such as check the 
books of accounts of stock exchanges and call for periodical returns, approve 
by-laws of stock exchanges, inspect the books of financial intermediaries 
such as banks, compel certain companies to get listed on one or more stock 
exchanges, and handle the registration of brokers. 


--- Page 59 ---
58 
Financial Institutions SEBI has three functions rolled into one body: quasi-judicial, quasi-executive 
and quasi-legislative:  
i) Quasi-Judicial: SEBI has the authority to deliver judgements related to
fraud and other unethical practices in terms of the securities market. This
helps to ensure fairness, transparency, and accountability in the securities
market.
ii) Quasi-Executive: SEBI is empowered to implement the regulations and
judgements made and to take legal action against the violators. It is also
authorised to inspect Books of accounts and other documents if it comes
across any violation of the regulations.
iii) Quasi-Legislative: SEBI reserves the right to frame rules and regulations
to protect the interests of the investors. Some of its regulations consist of
insider trading regulations, listing obligations, and disclosure
requirements. These have been formulated to keep malpractices at bay.
Though this makes SEBI very powerful, there is an appeal process to create 
accountability. There is a Securities Appellate Tribunal  (SAT) which is a 
three-member tribunal. Securities Appellate Tribunal (SAT) has been 
constituted to protect the interest of entities that feel aggrieved by SEBI’s 
decision. SAT consists of a presiding officer and two other members. 
A second appeal lies directly to the Supreme Court.  Furthermore, as part of 
its powers, SEBI can restrict or ban a person from entering the securities 
market. SEBI can issue such an order even while the inquiry is ongoing. By 
obtaining a disgorgement order, SEBI can recover illicit gains acquired by a 
person via illegal activity. 
SEBI can also take immediate action against companies that incorporate 
illegal schemes to generate revenue from retail investors, and it can prohibit a 
person acting as an intermediary, such as a research analyst, investment 
advisor, and so on, from soliciting/undertaking an activity in securities, either 
explicitly or implicitly. 
SEBI has sufficient regulatory guardrails and multiple statutes in place. Some 
of them are: 
i) Listing Obligations and Disclosure Requirements for Prevention of Fraud
and Unfair Trade Practices Rules.
ii) Level the playing field for retail investors and shield them from fraud.
iii) Active derivatives contracts in index stocks that allow investors to hedge
cash positions, circuit filters,
iv) Advanced and Graded Surveillance Mechanisms with stiff margining that
seek to rein in excessive single-day moves.


--- Page 60 ---
59 
SEBI Supreme Court held that the SEBI Act is a special law and a complete code in 
itself. Being a special Act dealing with a specific subject, it has to be read in 
harmony with the company law. Further, SEBI’s power to restrain an 
individual from acting as a director in a listed company has been upheld in 
several matters. Therefore, prohibition comes into effect immediately and it 
is not contingent on the process to be followed under the Companies Act 
(Sahoo and Agarwal, 2022). 
16.4.2  Mutual Fund Regulations by SEBI 
Over the past decade, the mutual fund industry has grown five-fold with 
assets under management touching ₹40-lakh crore in December 2022, from 
₹8-lakh crore in November 2012. From ₹10-lakh crore in May 2014, mutual 
funds’ assets under management (AUM) rose to ₹20-lakh crore in just three 
years in August 2017 and then crossed ₹30-lakh crore in November 2020 
(Kumar and Iyengar, 2023). 
SEBI has put in multiple regulations for mutual funds. Mutual funds are 
managed by Asset Management Companies (AMC), which need to be 
approved by SEBI. A Custodian who is registered with SEBI holds the 
securities of various schemes of the fund. The trustees of the AMC monitor 
the performance of the mutual fund and ensure that it works in compliance 
with SEBI Regulations. 
In August 1995, a self-regulation agency for mutual funds was set up called 
the Association of Mutual Funds of India (AMFI). AMFI focuses on 
developing the Indian mutual fund industry professionally and ethically. 
AMFI aims to enhance the operational standards in all areas to protect and 
promote mutual funds and their stakeholders. In April 2022, there were 44 
Asset Management Companies that were registered with SEBI and were 
members of AMFI. An AMC cannot have representation on the board of any 
other mutual fund. Shareholders can’t hold more than 10 per cent of the 
shares both directly and indirectly in the AMC of the mutual fund. 
Guidelines on Mutual Funds Reclassification: 
i) Funds must be named based on the core intent of the fund and asset mix.
It should specify the risk associated clearly.
ii) There will be 16 classifications for debt funds, 10 classifications for
equity funds, six classifications for hybrid, two for solution funds, and
two for index funds.
iii) Reclassified large-cap, mid-cap, and small-cap based on market cap
relative rankings rather than absolute market cap cut-offs. The debt fund
classification is prescribed based on the duration of the fund and the asset
quality mix.
