--- Page 41 ---
40 
Financial Institutions Financial Companies Acceptance of Public Deposits (Reserve Bank) 
Direction, 2016. 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) What are the important differences between banks and NBFIs?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
2) State four important functions of NBFIs
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
3) Explain the structure of NBFIs in India.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
4) Explain scale-based regulatory mechanisms for NBFCs.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
5) What is meant by shadow banking?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
15.6  HOUSING FINANCE COMPANIES (HFCs) 
In India, housing finance companies (HFCs) have about one-third of the 
market share in housing finance (second only to Scheduled Commercial 
Banks (SCBs). They are corporate entities that operate under the Companies 
Act of 1956. Their primary focus is providing housing loans or finance 
through various direct or indirect means. In terms of the amendment made to 
the National Housing Bank Act, 1987, pursuant the Union Budget 
announcements for 2019-20, the regulatory powers (including registration of 
HFCs) of National Housing Bank over Housing Finance Companies (HFCs) 
were transferred to the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) with effect from 


--- Page 42 ---
41 
Non-Bank Financial 
Intermediaries 
August 9, 2019. Thus, the Reserve Bank plays the role of regulator and 
ensures that existing HFCs comply with the principal business criteria i.e., 
net owned fund (NOF) requirements, and maintenance of liquidity coverage 
ratio (LCR) and capital adequacy ratio (CRAR). According to RBI, to qualify 
as HFCs, an NBFC must have 50% assets as housing loans 75% of which 
should be for individual homebuyers. 
HFCs play a very significant role as NBFI. Its asset quality, profitability and 
growth in credit disbursement have recorded an increase in the year 2022-23. 
With favourable market conditions owing to the government’s emphasis on 
affordable housing, favourable demographics and rising urbanisation, 
housing demand will experience a significant boost. HFCs are likely to play a 
significant role in this regard. Some HFCs have successfully operationalised 
co-lending models (CLM) with banks for housing as well as MSME loans. 
The inclusion of five HFCs in the upper layer by the Reserve Bank for the 
year 2023-24 in its scale-based regulatory framework highlights the systemic 
importance of HFCs in the Indian financial landscape. 
Earlier, the National Housing Bank (NHB) was the regulator of HFCs. From 
2019 onwards, RBI has laid down guidelines to regulate HFCs in the interest 
of investors and depositors.  
As we have discussed earlier the regulatory structure for Non-Banking 
Financial Companies (NBFCs) comprises four layers based on their size, 
activity and perceived riskiness: NBFCs-Base Layer (NBFCs-BL), NBFCs-
Middle Layer (NBFCs-ML), NBFCs Upper Layer (NBFCs-UL), NBFCs-Top 
Layer (NBFCsTL).  
Regarding HFCs, RBI has notified that they will be included in the Middle 
Layer or the Upper Layer (and not in the Base layer), as the case may be. The 
Upper Layer comprises those HFCs which are specifically identified by the 
Reserve Bank as warranting enhanced regulatory requirements based on a set 
of parameters and scoring methodology. The top ten eligible NBFCs 
(including HFCs) in terms of their asset size always reside in the upper layer, 
irrespective of any other factor. If RBI is of the opinion that a particular HCF 
is of significant risk, it can be moved to the top layer from the upper layer. 
Other HCFs are in the middle layer. Some other regulations are as follows: 
1) All non-deposit-taking HFCs with asset size of ₹100 crore and above and
all deposit-taking HFCs (irrespective of asset size) shall pursue liquidity
risk management.
2) It should cover adherence to gap limits, making use of liquidity risk
monitoring tools and adoption of a stock approach to liquidity risk.
3) HFCs shall maintain a liquidity buffer in terms of Liquidity Coverage
Ratio (LCR), which will promote their resilience to potential liquidity
disruptions by ensuring that they have sufficient High-Quality Liquid
Assets (HQLA) to survive any acute liquidity stress scenario lasting for
30 days.


--- Page 43 ---
42 
Financial Institutions 4) HFCs lending against the collateral of listed shares shall maintain a
Loan-To-Value (LTV) ratio of 50%. For loans granted against the
collateral of gold jewellery, HFCs shall maintain an LTV ratio not
exceeding 75%.
5) HFC cannot accept or renew public deposits unless it has obtained a
minimum investment grade rating for fixed deposits from any one of the
approved credit rating agencies, at least once a year.
6) HFCs to ensure that at all times, there is full cover available for public
deposits accepted by them. In case an HFC fails to repay any public
deposit or part thereof as per the terms, it shall not grant any loan or
other credit facility make any investment or create any other asset as
long as the default exists.
7) HFCs cannot lend against their shares.
8) Every housing finance company shall maintain a minimum Capital
Adequacy Ratio (CAR) on an ongoing basis. It shall not be less than
13% as of March 2020, 14% on or before March 2021, and 15% on or
before March 2022.
9) An HFC also cannot lend to any single borrower exceeding 15% of its
owned fund, and any single group of borrowers exceeding twenty-five
per cent of its owned fund.
10) It also cannot invest in the shares of another company exceeding 15% of
its owned funds and in shares of a single group of companies exceeding
25% of its owned funds.
11) The aggregate exposure of an HFC to the capital market in all forms
(both fund-based and non-fund-based) should not exceed 40% of its net
worth as of March 31 of the previous year.
15.7 ALL INDIA FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
(AIFIs) 
All India Financial Institutions (AIFIs) are an institutional mechanism 
entrusted with providing sector-specific long-term financing. These 
specialized financial entities serve particular sectors of the economy, 
including agriculture, housing, infrastructure, and small-scale industries. 
They are essential in providing long-term funding to support economic 
development. AIFIs are regulated by the Reserve Bank. There are 5 AIFIs 
regulated by RBI: the Export-Import Bank of India (EXIM Bank), the 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD), the 
National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development (NABFID), the 
National Housing Bank (NHB) and the Small Industries Development Bank 
of India (SIDBI).  


--- Page 44 ---
43 
Non-Bank Financial 
Intermediaries 
Over the years, the role of the AIFIs in the Indian financial system has 
undergone significant change reflecting the changes in their business models. 
As the Indian economy grows further, AIFIs are increasingly being seen as 
key institutions to promote the flow of direct or indirect credit to the 
economic sectors they cater to. Acknowledging their growing importance, 
RBI has extended Basil III Capital framework guidelines to AIFIs in 2023-
24. Some of the important guidelines are:
1) AIFIs will be required to maintain a minimum total capital of 9 per cent
by April 2024, wherein minimum tier-I capital will need to be at 7 per
cent and common equity tier-I (CET-1) capital at 5.5 per cent. For NHB,
the implementation date will be July 2024, given that its accounting year
is July–June.
2) All financial subsidiaries, except those engaged in insurance and non-
financial activities (both regulated and unregulated), will need to be fully
consolidated for the purpose of capital adequacy to ensure an assessment
of capital adequacy at the group level, taking into account the risk profile
of assets and liabilities of the subsidiaries.
3) AIFIs’ investments in capital instruments of banking, financial, and
insurance entities will be capped at 10 per cent of their capital funds.
AIFIs will not be allowed to acquire a fresh stake in a bank’s or AIFI’s
equity shares if the acquisition leads to its holding exceeding
5 per cent of the investee’s equity capital.
4) AIFIs’ equity investment in a single entity cannot exceed 49 per cent of
the equity of the investee. While AIFIs can hold this entire 49 per cent
stake as a pledgee, if the acquisition is against AIFI’s claims, the stake
will need to be brought below 10 per cent within three years.
15.8 PRIMARY DEALERS (PDs) 
The system of Primary Dealers (PDs) in the Government Securities Market 
was introduced by the Reserve Bank of India in 1995 to strengthen the 
market infrastructure of Government Securities (G-sec) and put in place an 
improved, efficient secondary market trading system. This was to encourage 
the holding of Government Securities on a large scale and make the market 
more vibrant and liquid. In 2006-07, RBI gave Banks the option to undertake 
Primary Dealership business departmentally.  
Primary Dealers can also be referred to as Merchant Bankers by the 
Government of India as only they are allowed to underwrite primary issues of 
government securities other than RBI who have since shed this role. In 2021, 
there were 21 Primary dealers out of which 14 are bank primary dealers and 7 
are standalone primary dealers.  RBI expects PDs to play an active role in the 
G-Sec market, both in its primary and secondary market segments through 
various obligations like participating in Primary auctions, market making in 
G-Sec, predominance of investment in G-Sec, achieving minimum secondary 


--- Page 45 ---
44 
Financial Institutions market turnover ratio, maintaining efficient internal control system for fair 
conduct of business etc. A PD is required to have a standing arrangement 
with RBI based on the execution of an undertaking and the authorization 
letter issued by RBI every three years. 
Stand-alone PDs are allowed the following activities as core activities: 
 Dealing and underwriting in Government securities.
 Dealing in Interest Rate Derivatives.
 Providing broking services in Government securities.
 Dealing and underwriting in Corporate / PSU / FI bonds/ debentures.
 Lending in Call/ Notice/ Term/ Repo/ CBLO market.
 Investment in Commercial Papers.
 Investment in Certificates of Deposit.
 Investment in Security Receipts issued by Securitization Companies/
Reconstruction Companies, Asset Backed Securities (ABS), and
Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS).
 Investment in debt mutual funds where the entire corpus is invested in
debt securities.
15.9  ISSUES AND CONCERNS IN THE NBFIs 
SECTOR 
While NBFIs can contribute to the economy, they also bring risks. Given the 
nature of their operations, NBFIs also carry inherent risks including, excess 
leverage, amplification of pro-cyclicality and over-reliance on wholesale 
funding. Given their exposure to niche segments, they may also suffer from 
the concentration of risks. They are often not allowed the benefit from the 
central bank as a lender of last resort and from deposit insurance institutions. 
The only way to control these risks is through proper regulation. Risk will 
vary depending upon the economic functions performed by NBFIs.  The 
challenge for regulation is striking the right balance between the risks and 
benefits. On the one hand, too little or no regulation can lead to a crisis and 
severely impact the vulnerable and the economy. Getting the right balance is 
a perpetual challenge for financial regulators and supervisors, not only in 
developing countries but also in developed and advanced economies. 
The business model of NBFIs is inherently risk-prone. Weaker underwriting 
standards, enhanced risk-taking capabilities and increased complexity of their 
activities cause concerns. Besides the riskiness of the business model, NBFIs 
are exposed to key risks emanating from regulatory gaps, arbitrage and 
contagion effects. NBFIs are more prone to systemic risks on account of the 
concentration of exposure to speciﬁc sectors. Also, since these entities are 
more dependent on funding from commercial banks, both directly and 


--- Page 46 ---
45 
Non-Bank Financial 
Intermediaries 
indirectly, the interconnectedness risk tends to be higher. Their asset-liability 
mismatches accentuate liquidity risks. These risks can quickly escalate as 
solvency risks and lead to systemic risk as well. Therefore, careful and 
continuous monitoring is still required to detect any increases in systemic risk 
factors (e.g. maturity liquidity transformation, and leverage) that could arise 
from the rapid expansion of credit provided by the non-bank sector. The 
report of the working group on the Issues and Concerns in the NBFC Sector 
(Thorat Committee, August 2011 ) has suggested reducing clutter and 
possibilities of arbitrage. It recognizes the regulatory priorities, the 
fundamental differences with the banking system and the arbitrage points to 
be plugged. All the prudential norms applicable to banks should apply to 
NBFCs as well.  
Besides that, NBFIs also face various challenges in terms of huge 
competition from banks, data security threats, dependence on banks for 
funding etc. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) What are Housing Finance Companies (HFCs)? How are they regulated
by RBI?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
2) Explain the guidelines by RBI issued for All India Financial Institutions
(AIFIs).
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
3) Discuss some issues and concerns related to NBFIs in India.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
15.10 LET US SUM UP 
NBFIs, also known as shadow banks, fill the gaps in financial services that 
otherwise occur in bank-based financial systems.  They are doing functions 
akin to that of banks, however, there are a few differences. NBFIs 
complement commercial banks by providing services that are not well suited 
to banks.  NBFIs play a range of roles.  They foster a risk management 
culture by encouraging those who are least able to bear risk to sell those risks 
to those better able to manage them. Thus, they broaden the spectrum of risks 


--- Page 47 ---
46 
Financial Institutions available to investors. They encourage investment and savings and improve 
the efficiency of investment and savings. They can enhance the resilience of 
the financial system to economic shocks.  
NBFCs are fast emerging as an important segment of the Indian financial 
system. It is a heterogeneous group of institutions (other than commercial and 
cooperative banks) performing financial intermediation in a variety of ways, 
like accepting deposits, making loans and advances, leasing, hiring 
purchases, etc. They have broadened and diversified the range of products 
and services offered by the financial sector. Thus, gradually, they are being 
recognised as complementary to the banking sector due to their customer-
oriented services; simplified procedures; attractive rates of return on deposits; 
flexibility and timeliness in meeting the credit needs of specified sectors; etc. 
NBFIs are a heterogeneous category of financial institutions. They comprise 
non-banking financial companies (NBFCs), Housing Finance companies 
(HFCs), All India financial institutions (AIFIs), and Primary dealers (PDs). 
Since 2023, The Reserve Bank of India has regulated NBFIs under Scale 
Based Regulation. The regulatory structure for Non-Banking Financial 
Companies (NBFCs) comprises four layers based on their size, activity and 
perceived riskiness. NBFCs in the lowest layer are known as NBFCs-Base 
Layer (NBFCs-BL). NBFCs in the middle layer and upper layer are known as 
NBFCs-Middle Layer (NBFCs-ML) and NBFCs Upper Layer (NBFCs-UL), 
respectively. The Top Layer is ideally expected to be empty and is known as 
NBFCs-Top Layer (NBFCs-TL). 
15.11  KEY WORDS 
Economies of Scale  : Large size of the asset portfolios enables the 
financial intermediaries to reap various economies 
of scale in portfolio management. The main 
economies are: 
a) reduction of risk through portfolio
diversification:
b) employment of efficient and professional
managers; 
c) the low administrative cost of large loans and
d) low costs of establishment, information and
transactions.
Financial        : 
intermediation 
A financial intermediary is a financial institution  
that connects surplus and deficit agents. An entity 
that acts as the middleman between two parties in a 
financial transaction. While a commercial bank is a 
typical financial intermediary, this category also 
includes other financial institutions such as 
investment banks, insurance companies, broker-
dealers, mutual funds and pension funds. Financial 


--- Page 48 ---
47 
Non-Bank Financial 
Intermediaries 
intermediaries offer several benefits to the average 
consumer including safety, liquidity and economies 
of scale.  
Hire purchase  : It is the legal term for a contract, in which persons 
usually agree to pay for goods in parts or a 
percentage at a time. 
Insurance  : 
Company 
It is a company that offers insurance policies to the 
public, either by selling directly to an individual or 
through another source such as an employee's 
benefit plan. An insurance company is usually 
comprised of multiple insurance agents. An 
insurance company can specialize in one type of 
insurance, such as life insurance, health insurance, 
or auto insurance, or offer multiple types of 
insurance. 
Investment  : 
Companies 
They are business entities, both privately and 
publicly owned, that manage, sell, and market funds 
to the public. They typically offer investors a variety 
of funds and investment services, which include 
portfolio management, record-keeping, custodial, 
legal, accounting and tax management services. 
Leasing  :   It is a process by which a firm can obtain the use of 
certain fixed assets for which it must pay a series of 
contractual, periodic, tax-deductible payments. The 
lessee is the receiver of the services or the assets 
under the lease contract and the lessor is the owner 
of the assets. The relationship between the tenant 
and the landlord is called a tenancy and can be for a 
fixed or indefinite period (called the term of the 
lease). The consideration for the lease is called rent. 
 
Microfinance  :   It is usually understood to entail the provision of 
financial services to micro-entrepreneurs and small 
businesses, which lack access to banking and related 
services due to the high transaction costs associated 
with serving these client categories. The two main 
mechanisms for the delivery of financial services to 
such clients are (1) relationship-based banking for 
individual entrepreneurs and small businesses; and 
(2) group-based models, where several 
entrepreneurs come together to apply for loans and 
other services as a group. 
Mutual fund: is a mediator that brings together a group of people 
and invests their money in stocks, bonds and other 
securities. Each investor owns shares, which 


--- Page 49 ---
48 
Financial Institutions 
Shadow Banking      : 
represent a portion of the holdings of the fund. 
Thus, a mutual fund is one of the most viable 
investment options for the common man as it offers 
an opportunity to invest in a diversified, 
professionally managed basket of securities at a 
relatively low cost. 
Shadow banks are those entities which performs 
activities (fully or partially) outside the regular 
banking system. The shadow banking sector in India 
primarily includes NBFCs 
Systemic risk  : 
In finance, systemic risk is the risk of collapse of an 
entire financial system or entire market, as opposed 
to risk associated with any one individual entity, 
group or component of a system. It can be defined 
as “financial system instability, potentially 
catastrophic, caused or exacerbated by idiosyncratic 
events or conditions in financial intermediaries”. It 
refers to the risks imposed by interlinkages and 
interdependencies in a system or market, where the 
failure of a single entity or cluster of entities can 
cause a cascading failure, which could potentially 
bankrupt or bring down the entire system or market.  
15.12 SOME USEFUL BOOKS AND REFERENCES  
 Bhole, L M and Jitendra Mahakud (2017): ‘ Financial Institution and
Markets’, 6th edition, Chapters 15 and 16, Tata McGraw-Hill Education
Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi
 Gupta, Suraj B. (1985): Monetary Economics: Institutions, Theory and
Policy, S. Chand and Company, New Delhi (Chapter 3 & 10).
 Gurusamy, S. (2009): Financial Services and Markets, Thomson, New
Delhi (Chapter 29).
 Khan, M Y (2017): ‘ Indian Financial System ’, 10 th edition, Tata
McGraw-Hill Education Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi
 Reserve Bank of India:
a) Annual Report (various issues)
b) Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India, 2022-23
 Neelima, K M and Anand Kumar (2017): Non-Banking Finance
Companies in India’s Financial Landscape, RBI Bulletin, October


--- Page 50 ---
 
 
49 
Non-Bank Financial 
Intermediaries 15.13 ANSWERS/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) NBFIs are a heterogeneous category of financial institutions. Banks form 
a homogeneous group doing banking business. the Reserve Bank has 
classiﬁed varieties of speciﬁc types of NBFIs separately and regulates 
each such type differently, Credit creation activities of the banks involve 
less time, while the lending activities of the non-bank intermediaries 
involve longer time. 
2) mobilization of savings, channelization of funds into investment, brokers 
of loanable funds, stabilize the capital market. 
3) They comprise non-banking financial companies (NBFCs), Housing 
Finance companies (HFCs), All India financial institutions (AIFIs), and 
Primary dealers (PDs). 
4) Refer to Sub-section 15.5.3 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) Corporate entities that operate under the Companies Act of 1956. Their 
primary focus is providing housing loans or finance through various 
direct or indirect means. Regarding HFCs, RBI has notified that they will 
be included in the Middle Layer or the Upper Layer. 
2) RBI has extended Basil III Capital framework guidelines to AIFIs in 
2023-24.  
3) Refer to Section 15.9 
15.14 TERMINAL QUESTIONS 
1) Describe the functions and working of NBFCs in India. 
2) NBFCs are doing functions similar to banks. What is the difference 
between banks & NBFCs?   
3) Analyse the role of the Reserve Bank in regulating NBFCs in India.  
4) What are the different types/categories of NBFIs registered with RBI? 
Does the Reserve Bank regulate all NBFCs? 
5) Explain the regulatory mechanism of NBFIs in India.       
