--- Page 61 ---
60 
Financial Institutions iv) All categories except index funds can only have one fund per
classification, i.e. an AMC can have a maximum of 34 funds other than
index funds.
SEBI has proposed AMCs to set up a Unit Holder Protection Committee  
across all products and services. This committee will independently review 
AMC’s decision from the unit-holders interest perspective. SEBI on 29 
March, 2023, has allowed: 
i) Diverse entities, including private equity funds, can become mutual
fund sponsors.
ii) Multiple environmental, social and governance (ESG) schemes can be
launched by MFs.
iii) It is also evaluating rules for the total expense ratio (TER) process by
MFs, for which detailed guidelines will be out soon.
iv) SEBI has brought in a backstop facility for specified debt funds. A
backstop fund has to be created by mutual funds to buy corporate bonds
during times of stress.
v) By strengthening and widening the existing eligibility criteria for
sponsors, the regulator has introduced an alternative route to enable a
diverse set of entities to become sponsors of MFs. This will make
private equity eligible to become a sponsor of MFs — a long pending
move.
Given the size of the industry and its importance to the economy, it is 
understandable that SEBI wishes to examine processes and practices across 
the industry. On paper, the rules and regulations governing funds are quite 
stringent but ensuring that 40 funds and their respective AMCs and trustees 
are complying strictly is a difficult task. SEBI will introduce “MF Lite” 
regulations during FY 2023-24 and these will reduce the compliance burden 
on the purveyors of passive instruments to around a tenth of current levels.  
It is good that the SEBI is proposing to make mutual fund AMCs more 
accountable and curtailing the practice of passing the blame for lapses on 
mutual fund trustees. This appears to have narrowed the responsibility of the 
trustees to a few core areas such as identifying conflicts of interest between 
the mutual fund shareholders and unit holders. With the formation of a unit-
holder protection committee under the Board of the AMC, the fund house is 
better placed to assume the responsibility of protecting investors (Editorial 
Comment, The Hindu Business Line, 02 April 2023). 
16.5 WORKING OF SEBI 
In this section, a brief sketch of the regulator’s work is given about the 
following areas (Sabarinathan, 2010): 


--- Page 62 ---
61 
SEBI 1) The primary market, market access and intermediaries : SEBI has
regulated the primary market  through (i) the regulation of issuers'
access to the market (ii) regulation of information production at the
time of issue, and (iii) regulation of processes and procedures relating
to the issuance of securities. All three aspects have evolved
considerably over the years.
2) Disclosure requirements : With the introduction of the corporate
governance requirements in 2000-01, disclosure of materially
significant related party transactions with promoters, directors,
management, subsidiaries, relatives and so on was added. Over the
years, having increased the frequency of quarterly reporting the
disclosure requirements have started mandating a more fine-grained
presentation of the performance of the company. SEBI has tightened
the disclosure requirements for listed firms. These norms are sensible
and they would help in reducing information asymmetry.
3) Corporate Governance: SEBI has led the effort to improve standards
of corporate governance in India. SEBI’s initiatives starting with the
committee headed by Mr Kumar Mangalam Birla and thereafter the
two reports presented by the Committee headed by Mr. N R Narayana
Murthy, culminated in the introduction of Clause 49 in the listing
agreement. The provisions of Clause 49 are often compared with the
Sarbanes Oxley Act 2002 and are said to draw upon that legislation in
the objectives as well as approach to regulating corporate governance.
4) Market for corporate control : Takeovers and acquisitions are
regulated by the SEBI. The Takeover Code has enabled an active
market for corporate control to evolve in India. The Takeover Code is
an initiative entirely attributable to SEBI.
5) Trading Mechanisms : SEBI played an important role in moving
many Indian stock exchanges to adopt an electronic trading system.
The automation of trading and post-trading systems on the major
stock exchanges (i) reduced manipulation of prices and concealment
of audit trails of such manipulation (ii) ensured investors received
time-based priority and correct prices for their (iii) fundamentally
altered the economics of the business of stock exchanges as the
operations of NSE and The Stock Exchange, Mumbai were allowed to
be extended electronically to other cities from 1996-97.
6) Settlement systems: With the introduction of the dematerialisation of
securities SEBI moved the stock exchanges gradually to a T+2 rolling
settlement from April 2003. These developments were also
accompanied by the discontinuation of several risk management
products that were in use in disguised forms such as the badla, a form
of futures-based trading. The combined result of these initiatives is the
reduction in transaction costs.


--- Page 63 ---
 
 
62 
Financial Institutions 7) Dematerialisation: Starting January 1998 dematerialisation was 
gradually made compulsory for all issuers and all IPOs in September 
2001. Dematerialisation brought about several benefits in terms of 
greater liquidity, no loss or risk on account of mutilation or loss of 
scrips, shorter periods of book closure for corporate actions such as 
dividends payments, rights or bonus issues; and eliminated delays in 
transfer of shares. The dematerialization has maintained the 
momentum that was provided by the regulatory push from SEBI.  
8) Institutionalisation of Trading and Ownership of Securities : A key 
feature of developed securities markets is the extent of institutional 
ownership of shares as well as the increasing share of institutions in 
securities trade. There is a strong and increasing link between FII 
inflows and market returns but of unsure causal direction. These 
investors have exerted pressure on Indian corporations to raise their 
standards of governance.   
9) Market Integrity and Insider Trading : To maintain the confidence of 
investors in the public securities market it is essential that no one 
should possess an informational advantage over the others and not 
exploit the same to derive pecuniary gains for themselves. Arthur 
Levitt, a former Chairman of the Securities and Exchange 
Commission of the USA opined that insider trading “has utterly no 
place in any fair-minded law-abiding economy”.  
Further, insider trading increases volatility. The SEBI approach 
centres around the prevention of insider trading by requiring listed 
companies, intermediaries and advisors to set up internal systems for 
preventing insider trading and reporting on compliance or otherwise to 
SEBI. Manipulative practices harm the interests of small and large 
investors alike as well as that of companies whose shares are subject 
to such practices. SEBI has addressed these through the SEBI 
(Fraudulent and Unfair Trade Practices) Regulation, 2003. SEBI has 
backed up these regulatory measures with a substantial investment in 
the surveillance of the markets. 
SEBI’s effort at improving the integrity of securities markets also 
includes its attempts at improving governance. In particular, the 
separation of ownership and trading rights should enable the stock 
exchanges to effectively curtail the level of manipulative practices in 
the market. SEBI has shown substantial progress in taking action 
against or disposing of such cases.  
SEBI has investigated various instances of front-running over the past 
several years. The regulator thus needs to crack down quickly to 
demonstrate that such actions will not be tolerated. It could also 
consider putting in place fresh measures in terms of monitoring 
employees with access to confidential information and fiduciary 
responsibility in asset management companies and other financial 


--- Page 64 ---
63 
SEBI institutions (Editorial Comment, Business Standard May 10, 2022). In 
October 2022, the inclusion of trading in units of mutual funds in 
insider trading regulation was long overdue and will stop those 
working in fund houses from gaining unfairly from unpublished price-
sensitive information. 
10) Ownership and Governance of stock exchanges : SEBI’s most
significant initiative to improve the governance of stock exchanges in
India was the move to separate ownership and trading rights, referred
to as corporatization and de-mutualisation (C&D). The principal
requirement of C&D was that all stock exchanges would be
corporatized and that not less than 51 per cent of the ownership of the
stock exchanges was to be held by the public other than shareholders
having trading rights.
11) Compliance Enforcement : SEBI has been less effective in
prosecutions and penalizing erring market participants for non-
compliance. Some experts attribute this to the absence of specialized
courts that can deal with matters involving the financial markets. This
is the reason for SEBI’s lack of success in securing prosecution
against various offences. Financial leakages through related party
transactions remain a focus area of SEBI where rules are constantly
being tightened. As companies find escape routes, SEBI continues to
tweak its regulations to close innovative hatches. Gaps remain,
emboldening the bending of regulations. Regulations cannot plug all
holes.
Index Providers: In a move to bring more transparency and structure to the 
market, SEBI proposes that index providers need to consider all relevant data 
for creating an index. It also needs to exercise enough care and caution to 
ensure that there is no distortion of the data. It needs to exercise due diligence 
in the onboarding of data submitters. And, importantly, the index provider 
has to ensure that the data submitters source data from only regulated entities 
and no other sources. With the exponential increase in the number of passive 
funds and the assets under management of these funds, the governance of the 
indices assumes greater significance (Saravanan and Banerjee, 2023). 
SEBI on 29 March 2023 adopted a slew of guidelines in its quarterly board 
meeting. Such as the introduction of an ASBA-like mechanism for secondary 
trades, bonus issue of shares, removal of permanent positions in board seats, 
allowing private equity firms to become mutual fund sponsors, a backstop 
facility to help MFs during stress, a mechanism for preventing and detecting 
stock market frauds and the new Environment Social and Governance (ESG) 
norms. Some of these measures will surely improve corporate governance. 
For example, the removal of the permanence of board seats gives 
shareholders a larger say in deciding on the tenure of board members and 
giving the Nomination and Remuneration committees more powers. 


--- Page 65 ---
64 
Financial Institutions Check Your Progress 2 
1) How does SEBI regulate the capital market?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
2) Describe the structure of SEBI.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
3) What is the role of the Securities Appellate Tribunal (SAT)?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
4) Highlight SEBI’s important regulations for mutual funds.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
16.6 CHALLENGES BEFORE SEBI 
The massive size of illegal businesses and the huge spread of finfluencers 
across platforms such as Telegram, Instagram, WhatsApp, Facebook, and 
YouTube, make one feel that SEBI has already lost the battle to control them 
(Basu, 2022). Several social media influencers on YouTube, Twitter, 
Telegram and other platforms are disseminating financial advice without any 
requisite qualification to do so, which has resulted in instances detrimental to 
the market. There are people on social media platforms who peddle 
information for their benefit and need to be closely followed for their 
utterances. However, people who have honest opinions about stocks should 
be free to express their views. 
The key question to be posed before regulating financial influencers is 
whether they are doing something dishonest. The financial influencers 
sometimes mislead investors. The main problem relates to advertising. 
Baiting people who purchase something without having proper knowledge 
and fail to take precautions are the sufferers in the markets. If legislation is to 
be made for regulating such happenings a need will arise to define the very 
concept of ‘ finfluencers’. This will attract knowledgeable persons having 
genuine market insight into the purview of legislation and prevent the free 
flow of such information which harms the investors. 


--- Page 66 ---
65 
SEBI In the case of self-dealing by an investment adviser regarding suggested 
investments are prone to conflicts of interest and this warrants disclosures. 
The fintech revolution is fundamentally changing not only products and 
processes in the financial sector; it is also making things more challenging for 
financial sector regulators. 
While regulations are often static or slow-moving, the lightning speed of 
technological changes and new business innovations at the regulatory 
boundaries are changing market practices rapidly. Questions are being raised 
about the ability of regulators to regulate the increasingly hi-tech and at times 
‘decentralised’ mode of products, services and delivery innovations in the 
financial sector (Nair and Sahoo, 2022). 
Taking timely action against violators is imperative in effectively regulating 
the market and in maintaining market integrity. The Fintech revolution has 
taken the hitherto risk factors into the realm of complete uncertainty, which 
as conventional wisdom tells us, cannot be regulated. 
Once the regulatory text achieves an appropriate degree of precision and data 
are organised as needed by the experts, technical experts can take over the 
task of converting the language-based regulations into algorithms. Regulators 
need to quickly cover a lot of miles, to remain relevant in the era of tech-
revolution (Nair and Sahoo, 2022). 
SEBI has directed the designated depository participants (DDPs) to update 
the list of ultimate beneficial owners (UBOs). In India, it has been noticed 
that in a large number of cases, foreign portfolio investors (FPIs) are just 
registered vehicles, but the UBOs of their positions are hidden (Shah, 2023). 
The names of the UBOs have often been a sensitive subject for the Indian 
stock markets since FPIs prefer to keep them hidden from the public. But the 
world over, the money laundering norms are forcing regulators to lift the 
corporate veil. SEBI has threatened the DDPs that their FPI licences will be 
cancelled if they do not divulge the UBOs, and their positions will have to be 
wound up by March 2024. SEBI has asked all the DDPs to update the details 
of UBOs of all the FPIs registered in India (Shah, 2023). 
SEBI now wants to put the onus of prevention and detection of fraud and 
market abuse on the stock brokers. According to SEBI, the list of probable 
instances and indicators of fraud or market abuse, which a broker’s system 
should be equipped to monitor, should include: 
i) creation of the misleading appearance of trading,
ii) price manipulation,
iii) front running,
iv) insider trading,
v) mis-selling,
vi) unauthorised trading, including the facilitation of ‘mule’ accounts that
act as a front for unauthorised trading,


--- Page 67 ---
 
 
66 
Financial Institutions vii) pump and dump, spoofing,  
viii) disproportionate trading activity vis-à-vis reported income, net worth, 
and  
ix) frequent changes in KYC submitted by clients. 
(https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/markets/SEBI-burdens-stock-
brokers-with-more-compliance/article66482308.ece) 
The problem of money belonging to Indian entities being ‘round-tripped’ 
through shell companies in offshore tax havens is not a new one. Despite 
regulatory tightening over the years, loopholes are exploited to conceal the 
beneficial owners of the shell companies.  
The problem is that many of these FPIs are structured as multi-layered 
entities where it is easy to conceal the ultimate owner of the company. 
Identification of beneficial owners was based on Rule 9 of the Prevention of 
Money-laundering (Maintenance of Records) Rules, 2005, wherein 
companies owning more than 25 per cent of the FPI or individuals, 
partnership firms, trusts and unincorporated associations of persons owning 
15 per cent of the FPI were identified as beneficial owner (BO). In case a BO 
could not be identified through ownership or control, the investment manager 
had to be identified as the BO and his details provided to the depository. 
SEBI needs to apply the ‘look through’ principle in such cases, where 
following the letter of law may not prove adequate. Stringent penalties should 
be imposed on market intermediaries abetting such fund flows; they should 
be banned from markets altogether. SEBI should also reduce the time given 
to FPIs to disclose the BO to three months (Editorial Comment, The Hindu 
Business Lines, 09 February 2023). 
16.7 EVALUATION OF SEBI’S PERFORMANCE 
SEBI is without a doubt one of India’s most powerful regulatory entities. By 
regulating the Indian financial industry through its various divisions, it plays 
a significant role in preventing big financial frauds. Notwithstanding initial 
handicaps, SEBI seems to have fared well. It is an autonomous and suitably 
empowered agency with the requisite knowledge and human resources. It has 
managed to design an operationally safe market and is among the most cost-
competitive, leaving aside taxes. There have been very few payment crises of 
the kind that prevailed in the early mid-nineties. Risks in the execution of 
trade and counterparty risks have been eliminated to a substantial degree. 
India has one of the better public offering mechanisms in the world that 
allows for reasonable price discovery and is capable of handling huge 
volumes of applications, although it has cracked a few times under the 
onslaught of deviant market participants.  
SEBI has put in place a comprehensive web of regulations that ensure a range 
of market participants and intermediaries have the capacity and the incentives 
to function well in a coordinated fashion. The disclosure system at the time of 


--- Page 68 ---
67 
SEBI listing as well as post-listing compares with the best in the world. The 
accounting rule writing and administration system has been strengthened with 
the establishment of NACAS. Despite some initial pushback and 
compromises, SEBI has rolled out a corporate governance code that is often 
compared with the Sarbanes Oxley Act of the USA. India scores well on the 
index of disclosure requirements. Similarly, SEBI fares well in terms of the 
powers of the supervisory authority and autonomy but ranks way below the 
SEC in terms of enforcement powers (Sabarinathan, 2010). 
Experts attribute SEBI’s regulatory effectiveness to the Board structure, the 
demarcation of policymaking to the members of the Board and its 
implementation to the executive directors. Further, its effectiveness in 
implementing market design reforms lies in the fact that it was “completely 
detached concerning the rentiers”. SEBI’s track record in building internal 
competence appears to compare favourably with that of RBI. 
The recent report of the International Organisation of Securities Commissions 
(IOSCO) reviewing the adherence of regulators of 55 countries to its main 
principles is very timely. It comes as a relief for the SEBI that, concerning 
the IOSCO’s five core principles it scores reasonably well. The five 
principles are (Editorial comment, The Hindu Business Line, 26 February 
2023): 
i) clear and objectively stated responsibilities,
ii) operational independence and accountability,
iii) adequate power and resources,
iv) clear and consistent regulatory processes, and
v) skilled and reliable staff.
That probably explains how India’s stock market weathered disasters such as 
the global financial crisis and the pandemic-led meltdown well. The IOSCO 
report has lauded SEBI for being well-funded by the fee. It is just as well that 
the officials of SEBI have been provided legal protection to ensure that no 
action can be taken against them for actions carried out in good faith. 
The SEBI has played an important role in the fast-paced development of the 
domestic market over the last three decades, protecting investor interests, 
there have been some instances where the actions, or absence thereof, of the 
regulator have come under scrutiny (Editorial Comment, The Hindu Business 
line, 26 February, 2023). 
16.8 SUGGESTIONS FOR MAKING SEBI 
EFFECTIVE 
SEBI needs to reinvent itself and its regulations to control market 
manipulation in the digital era. In this context, three aspects are important 
(Editorial Comment, The Hindu Business Line, 19 May 2022): 


--- Page 69 ---
68 
Financial Institutions i) India’s financial market evolves with rising retail participation, market
regulations need to keep up with new products and asset classes that are
springing up. Newer options such as curated stock portfolios and digital
gold which are quite popular with retail investors, are in the grey zone.
ii) The widespread use of social media platforms such as WhatsApp, Twitter
and YouTube apart from apps that encrypt and instantly purge messages,
are helping rogue players bypass checks, with the result that mass
dissemination of false information about dodgy companies has become
rampant. SEBI’s regulations must be rewritten to plug this gap.
iii) There is a need to do away with redundant regulations wherever
warranted to facilitate market development. Updating laws apart, SEBI
needs to keep up with new-age fraudsters and must be armed with the
skillsets and regulatory powers to keep up close surveillance of
communications through the digital media, call for information and carry
out decryption to decipher such data.
iv) SEBI is quite right to seek powers from the Government under the
Information Technology Act, 2000 and the Information Technology
(Procedure and Safeguard for Monitoring and Collecting Traffic Data or
Information) Rules, to be allowed to access digital communication
channels and carry out interception and decryption of such information.
To keep up with scamsters, the SEBI will also have to build internal
capacity and skillsets in efficiently mining surveillance data, connecting
the dots and building a convincing evidence trail.
The Kotak Committee on Corporate Governance had noted that SEBI was 
severely under-staffed, overseeing 5,000-odd listed companies with just 800-
odd staff while the US SEC had over 4,500 employees to oversee an equal 
number of companies. Apart from adding numerically to its workforce, SEBI 
must look at lateral hiring of data science and tech talent at competitive pay 
scales, to improve its regulatory capacity to keep up with the times. 
SEBI’s amendments in 2021 mark a significant departure in reporting norms 
for listed firms. But more needs to be done. There is an increasing investor 
focus on sustainability investing, shifting from finance-centric investment 
models to more socially and environmentally responsible long-term investing 
trends. As a result, the demand for Environmental, Social and Governance 
(ESG) investing has gained significant traction globally which focuses on 
non-financial factors as a metric for guiding investment decisions wherein 
increased financial returns are no longer the sole objective of investors. 
Integrating ESG disclosures with corporate governance practices of 
companies is becoming extremely consequential from an investment 
standpoint as it plays a significant role in assessing the valuation of 
companies (Dayal and Sawhney, 2022). 


--- Page 70 ---
69 
SEBI To address these issues, India needs to strengthen its corporate governance 
framework and implementation in both law and spirit. This requires:  
i) explaining the ties between business and politics,
ii) increasing transparency in ownership structures,
iii) enhancing the independence and accountability of auditors,
iv) improving the enforcement of rules, and
v) actions of regulators and policymakers should lead to the creation of a
level playing field for all businesses, irrespective of their size or political
connections.
Admittedly, SEBI should continue to strengthen its regulatory framework by 
pre-emptively enforcing regulations and ensuring markets for securities 
remain fair, transparent and trustworthy. By strengthening corporate 
governance, India can create a business environment conducive to long-term 
investment and prosperity of the country. The suggestion about setting up a 
common platform for dissemination of all information by mutual funds 
sounds like a good idea which will make it easier for investors to search for 
fund-related information. The judicial infrastructure in India needs 
improvement. 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) What are the important challenges before SEBI?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
2) How is SEBI working to meet the technological challenge being faced by
it?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
3) What is SEBI’s corporate governance code?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
4) What is sustainability investment in Environmental, Social and
Governance (ESG)?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
