--- Page 11 ---
10 
Financial Institutions UNIT 14  COMMERCIAL BANKING 
Structure 
14.0  Objectives 
14.1  Introduction 
14.2   Meaning and Role of Commercial Banks in Economic Development 
14.2.1  What is a Commercial Bank? 
14.2.2  Importance and Role of Commercial Banks in Economic Development 
14.3   Functions of Commercial Banks 
 14.3.1  Banking Functions 
 14.3.2  Non-banking Functions 
14.4  Structure of Commercial Banks 
14.4.1  Retail Banking versus Corporate Banking 
14.4.2  Universal Banking 
 14.4.3  Differentiated Banking 
14.5 Creation of Credit/Deposits 
14.5.1  Limits to Credit Creation 
14.6 Principles Governing Distribution of Assets of Commercial Banks 
14.6.1  Liquidity versus Profitability of Assets 
14.7 Recent Trends and Performance of the Banking Industry in India 
14.8 Let Us Sum Up 
14.9     Key Words 
14.10   Some Useful Books 
14.11   Answers/Hints to Check your Progress Exercises 
14.12   Terminal Questions 
14.0 OBJECTIVES  
After going through this unit, you will be able to: 
 define a Commercial Bank and describe its functions;
 illustrate the process of creation of credit by Commercial Banks;
 indicate limits to credit creation;
 highlight the role of the banking system in economic development; and
 Identify the trend and analyze the factors driving growth in the banking
industry in India,


--- Page 12 ---
11 
Commercial Banking 14.1 INTRODUCTION  
As discussed in Unit 2, Financial intermediaries (FIs) refer to those 
institutions that serve the money and capital markets. They act as middlemen 
between lenders and borrowers, creating and issuing financial obligations of 
claims against themselves to acquire profitable financial claims against 
others. A chief function of an intermediary is to provide liquidity.  FIs can be 
broadly classified into (1) commercial banks, and (2) non-banking financial 
institutions (NBFIs). Commercial Banks are the dominant financial 
intermediaries. Bank deposits form the dominant portion of the financial 
savings of the household sector, and bank credit is the most important source 
of external finance. Commercial Banks can be distinguished from other 
financial intermediaries in terms of the special power to issue liabilities that 
are accepted as a means of payment. Commercial banks play an important 
role in the economic development of any country. In this unit, you will learn 
about the Commercial banks, the functions of commercial banks, the method 
of credit creation by commercial banks, and the role of Commercial banks in 
the economic development of a country. This unit will also discuss some 
recent trends in banking sector in India. 
14.2 MEANING AND ROLE OF COMMERCIAL 
BANKS IN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
14.2.1  What is a Commercial Bank? 
The term ‘ Bank' has been defined differently by different economists. A 
Commercial bank is a profit-seeking institution which pays interest at a low 
rate to the depositors and charges a higher rate of interest from the borrowers 
and in this way, the bank earns a profit. Commercial Banks are dealers in 
debt, and this more aptly describes their activities. A deposit is a debt which 
the commercial bank owes to the depositor; a banknote is a sort of 
promissory note — an acknowledgement of the issuing bank’s debt to 
whomsoever may be the bearer of it; using loans and overdrafts’ a bank 
creates debts to itself. All Commercial banks deal in money and credit 
instruments. In the words of Paul Samuelson , “The primary economic 
function of commercial banks is to hold demand deposits and honour cheques 
drawn on them — in short, to provide us, the economy with the most 
important component of our money supply. It is to be noted that banking is a 
business like any other business. A Commercial bank is a relatively simpler 
business concern. It provides certain services for customers (depositors and 
borrowers) and in return receives payment from them in one form or another. 
It tries to earn a profit”. Acceptance of chequeable deposits from the public is 
only a necessary, but not a sufficient , function of a bank.  It must also lend to 
others.  
It is difficult to define the term ‘ bank’ as the concept itself is rapidly 
changing given changes in social-economic conditions, government policies, 
priorities etc. For example: We see the new trends of digital banks, neo 


--- Page 13 ---
12 
Financial Institutions banks, post payments banks, small finance banks etc. emerging in the 
country. We will discuss about them briefly in Section 14.7. Thus, one can 
say that a bank is a financial institution that deals in debts and credits. It 
accepts deposits, lends money and creates money. It bridges the gap between 
the savers and borrowers. As R S Sayers  has emphasised, “banks are not 
merely purveyors of money but also in an important sense manufacturer of 
money”. From the above, it can be deduced that the bank is a financial 
institution. 
14.2.2  Importance and Role of Commercial Banks in 
Economic Development 
Commercial Banks have always played an important role in the country’s 
economy. They play a decisive role in the development of the industry and 
trade. They act not only as the custodians of the wealth of the country but 
also as a resource of the country, which is necessary for the economic 
development of a nation. Their presence is helpful to the economic activity 
and industrial progress of a country. Commercial Banks satisfy the financial 
needs of the sectors of the economy as well as all sections of the society. That 
means they play a very significant role in economic and social needs. The 
relationship between financial development and economic growth is a 
complex phenomenon. Finance contributes to economic growth in the sense 
that it increases the volume of investment and improves resource allocation . 
Whatever may have been its origin, a bank deposit serves as money, and 
therefore, besides representing so much purchasing power, it acquires 
importance because of its dynamic function of influencing the level of 
economic activity. Consequently, the creation of deposits by banks is a matter 
of vital concern to modern governments, in their efforts to achieve their 
economic objectives. 
A well-developed banking system is an essential pre-condition to the 
effective implementation of monetary policy. Thus, a fine, efficient and 
comprehensive banking system is a crucial factor in the developmental 
process. Commercial Banks not only relieve the public of anxiety and risk of 
safeguarding their surplus income but also provide facilities for savings and 
investment. They are useful in promoting banking habits among the people, 
discouraging unprofitable locking up of the community’s wealth and 
reducing idle capital of the community. Commercial Banks in turn supply 
idle funds of the community to businessmen, industrialists and entrepreneurs 
who require funds for running and developing their businesses and industry. 
Commercial banks play an important role in the promotion of financial 
inclusion which is a pre-requisite of inclusive growth. In short, Commercial 
banks play an important and dynamic role in the economic life of every 
modern state. The economic importance of commercial banks may be viewed 
as follows: 
a) Promoting capital formation;
b) Encouraging innovation;


--- Page 14 ---
13 
Commercial Banking c) Influencing economic activity;
d) Promoter of financial inclusion; and
e) Facilitator of monetary policy.
The boundary which demarcates the operations of commercial banks and the 
Financial intermediaries (Fis) is eliminated, they are allowed to move 
towards universal banking and they are helped to cope with the recent 
changes.  
In the field of  international business,  commercial banks offer services such 
as trade finance, project finance, payroll, foreign exchange transactions and 
trading, lock boxes for collecting payments and general corporate finance. 
Without commercial banks, the international finance and import-export 
industry would not have grown to the level it has today. The global nature of 
commercial banking also makes it possible to distribute valuable economic 
and business information among customers and the capital markets of all 
countries. Commercial banking also serves as a worldwide barometer of 
economic health and business trends. 
14.3  FUNCTIONS OF COMERCIAL BANKS 
Commercial banks being financial institutions perform diverse types of 
functions. These functions may be broadly divided into banking functions 
and non-banking functions.  
14.3.1  Banking Functions 
A) Exchanging money claims : Exchange of money claims includes
acceptance of deposits, giving loans and advances, discounting bills of
exchange, and transferring money from one place to another.
1) Accepting Deposits: Deposits differ from one another in respect of
facilities for withdrawal and rate of interest. People make their
choices from various kinds of deposits based on the requirements
of their families and businesses. These deposits may be in the form
of: (i) saving bank deposits, (ii) current deposits, (iii)
recurring/cumulative deposits, and (iv) fixed deposits.
2) Loans and Advances : The most important banking function,
therefore, is the creation of credit. It is this function which
distinguishes banks from other financial institutions. Commercial
banks use the deposits of their customers as a source of lending
assets. Advances may be made to clients through the loan system
or overdraft system. The former is simpler. An amount is placed to
the credit of the borrower who can withdraw the whole or a part of
it as and when he likes. But for the period that the loan is not
repaid, he pays interest on the whole sum, whether he makes use of
it or not. An overdraft facility, on the other hand, means allowing a


--- Page 15 ---
14 
Financial Institutions client to draw cheques over the amount standing to his credit. 
Interest payable to the bank is only on the amount utilized. 
3) Discounting Bills of Exchange : Discounting a bill of exchange is,
technically speaking, purchasing a future claim of money. In
essence, however, it means advancing a loan against a promise of
repayment in future. An essential difference between advancing a
loan and discounting a bill of exchange is that in the case of the
latter, the bank is certain that money is used for genuine trade
purposes.
4) Transfer of Money : Money may be transferred from one place to
another by a bank draft or advice of a cheque. Now a days large
sums of money are being transferred through NEFT (National
Electronic Fund Transfer)/RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement).
All the above banking functions can be summed up in a single function, viz. 
that banks exchange money claims . The most important banking function is 
the creation of credit. It is this function which distinguishes banks from other 
financial institutions. The basic economic function of bank intermediation 
can be summarized as follows: 
1) Liability-Asset transformation  i.e., accepting deposits as a liability and
converting them into assets such as loans;
2) Size transformation i.e., providing large loans based on numerous small
deposits;
3) Maturity transformation  i.e., offering savers alternate forms of deposits
according to their liquidity preferences while providing borrowers with
loans of desired maturities; and
4) Risk transformation  i.e., distributing risk through diversification would
prevail while lending directly in the absence of financial transformation.
5) The functions performed by banks are changing with the changing
scenario and recently they are widening their functions and becoming
customer-centric.
14.3.2  Non-banking Functions 
These are the services which banks render to their clients not as banks, but as 
profit-seeking firms. These functions, therefore, do not fall within the 
purview of banking proper. Thus, banks may undertake:  
i) Collection of cheques, drafts, bills, hundis, and other instruments
(inland and foreign) for their depositors;
ii) Issue of performance and financial guarantees;
iii) Provision of remittance facilities by issue of drafts, mail transfers etc.


--- Page 16 ---
15 
Commercial Banking iv) Provision of facilities of safe custody of deeds and securities and safe
deposit vaults;
v) Purchase and sale of securities for their constituents;
vi) Provision of special investment services as underwriters and bankers for
new issues of securities to the public. In selected cases, banks also
arrange for the private placement of securities;
vii) Acting as executors and trustees;
viii) Rendering of agency services of various kinds such as sale of foreign
exchange, acceptance of income-tax payment, etc.;
ix) Miscellaneous services such as the issue of traveler’s cheques, gift
cheques, provision of tax assistance and investment advice, references,
business and statistical information etc. They also provide a wide
variety of loans and offer other credit vehicles like cards and overdrafts.
However, the common theme among these activities is that they are
aimed at providing a financial service to an individual or business.
In short, they may undertake to be ‘watchmen ’ of valuables, executants of 
wills and administrators of family trusts. Banks are said to be department 
stores of financial services as they render a wide variety of such services to 
their customers. The range of these services differs from bank to bank, 
depending mainly on the size and type of banks. Most of us interact with 
commercial banks every day, whether it is a debit card purchase, an online 
payment or a loan application. Beyond providing these basic services, 
commercial banks are in the business of capital allocation for profit – also 
known as investing. Today, commercial banks can invest in securities and 
even in issues that they help make public. A commercial bank needs to 
provide good service to its customers and good returns to its investors to 
continue to be successful. 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) What is a Commercial Bank?  How are banks characterised as dealers in
debt?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
2) “Financial intermediaries (FIs) serve the money and capital markets”.
Explain.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………


--- Page 17 ---
16 
Financial Institutions 3) List any five important functions of a Commercial Bank.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
14.4   STRUCTURE OF COMMERCIAL BANKS 
The structure of commercial banking varies from country to country. 
Banking structure is influenced by several factors such as traditions, 
economic conditions, political situation, public attitude, government factors 
and topographical conditions. Different banking systems came into existence 
with the development of banking in the world. Important among them are 
branch banking, unit banking, group banking and chain banking.   
Commercial banks may be either of the branch-banking type, such as the 
commercial banks in India, under which case each bank has several branches 
spread all over the country, or the unit-banking type, which originated in the 
U.S.A., where each bank’s operations are confined to a single office. Group 
banking consists of the ownership and operation of two or more banks 
directly or indirectly by a corporation. The group is organised around a key 
bank which in turn is controlled by a holding company.  This banking system 
enjoys the advantages of both branch banking and unit banking.  However, it 
suffers from certain handicaps like direct control over the constituents, 
difficulty of supervision and control and influence of failure of one member 
on the other.  Chain banking is another form of group banking.  It is similar 
to group banking.  Chain banking refers to a system where two or more banks 
are controlled by a single person or group of persons through stock 
ownership or otherwise.  Thus, there is a less formal arrangement than group 
banking.  This system was developed in the USA to overcome the drawbacks 
of the unit’s banking system. This banking system also enjoys the advantages 
of both a branch system and a unit banking system.   
14.4.1  Retail Banking versus Corporate Banking 
Retail banking refers to the division of a bank that deals directly with retail 
customers. Also known as consumer banking or personal banking, retail 
banking is the visible face of banking to the general public, with bank 
branches located in abundance in most major cities. Banks that focus purely 
on retail clientele are relatively few, and most retail banking is conducted by 
separate divisions of banks, large and small. Customer deposits garnered by 
retail banking represent an extremely important source of funding for most 
banks. Corporate banking, also known as business banking , refers to the 
aspect of banking that deals with corporate customers. The term was 
originally used in the United States to distinguish it from investment banking 
after the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933 separated the two activities. While 
that law was repealed in the 1990s, corporate banking and investment 
banking services have been offered for many years under the same umbrella 


--- Page 18 ---
17 
Commercial Banking by most banks in the United States and elsewhere. Corporate banking is a key 
center of profit for most banks; however, as the biggest originator of 
customer loans, it is also the source of regular write-downs for loans that 
have soured.  
14.4.2  Universal Banking 
Universal banking is a system in which banks provide a wide variety of 
financial services, including commercial and investment services. Universal 
banks may offer credit, loans, deposits, asset management, investment 
advisory, payment processing, securities transactions, underwriting and 
financial analysis. While a universal banking system allows banks to offer a 
multitude of services, it does not require them to do so. Banks in a universal 
banking system may still choose to specialize in a subset of banking services. 
Universal banking combines the services of a commercial bank and an 
investment bank, providing all services from within one entity. The services 
can include deposit accounts, and a variety of investment services and may 
provide insurance services. Under this system, banks can choose to 
participate in any or all of the permitted activities. They are expected to 
comply with all guidelines that govern or direct proper management of assets 
and transactions. Since not all institutions participate in the same activities, 
the regulations in play may vary from one institution to another. It is 
important not to confuse the term ‘universal bank ’ with any financial 
institutions with similar names. 
Proponents of universal banking argue that it helps banks diversify risk in a 
better manner. They facilitate the possibility of lowered costs because of the 
economies of scale. Costs would drop because of the larger volume of 
investment for a given level of overhead on investment. The underlying logic 
for this is that the cost of offering various activities by different units is 
greater than when they are offered together. The economies of scale and 
scope are expected to help the entity deal better with business cycles. A shift 
in the business cycle is expected to alter the demand for products. Multi-
product firms are, therefore, inherently better placed to handle changes in 
the type of product demanded.  The move towards universal banking is not 
without concern on the regulatory front.   The advent of universal banks 
simultaneously increases the risk to the system in case of a failure.   Another 
argument often advanced to oppose the move to consolidate is that the size of 
the universal banks provides them with an opportunity to have monopoly, by 
resorting to predatory pricing competition from small players which offer 
specialised services.  
14.4.3 Differentiated Banking 
Differentiated banks are distinct from universal banks as they function in a 
niche segment. The differentiation could be on account of capital 
requirement, scope of activities or area of operations. As such, they offer a 
limited range of services / products or function under a different regulatory 


--- Page 19 ---
18 
Financial Institutions dispensation. The concept is not entirely new. In fact, and in a sense, the 
Urban Cooperative Banks (UCBs), the Primary Agricultural Credit Societies 
(PACS), the Regional Rural Banks (RRBs), Local Area Banks (LABs), Small 
Finance Banks (SFBs), and Payments Banks could be considered as 
differentiated banks as they operate in localized areas and provide banking 
services to underserved segments of the economy/society. 
Reserve Bank of India set up of a committee headed by Shri Nachiket Mor, 
on Comprehensive Financial Services for Small Businesses and Low-Income 
Households to look into the issues relating to financial inclusion. The 
committee came up with two broad designs for the banking system in the 
country - the Horizontally Differentiated Banking System (HDBS) and the 
Vertically Differentiated Banking System (VDBS) based on the functional 
building blocks of payments, deposits and credit. 
In a HDBS design, the basic design element remains a full-service bank that 
combines all three building blocks of payments, deposits, and credit but is 
differentiated primarily on the dimension of size or geography or sectoral 
focus. In a VDBS design, the full-service bank is replaced by banks that 
specialise in one or more of the building blocks of payments, deposits, and 
credit. Among others, the Committee suggested licensing of Payments Bank 
and wholesale banks as differentiated banks. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) “Banks promote savings and help to convert hoardings into investment”.
Amplify.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
2) Write a note on the structure of commercial banks.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
3) What is Commercial Universal banking? Why are they popular these
days?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
4) What is differentiated banking?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………


--- Page 20 ---
19 
Commercial Banking 14.5  CREATION OF CREDIT/DEPOSITS 
Credit creation is the most significant function of commercial banks. The 
essential feature of commercial banking is the lending of more cash than the 
amount held by the bank. Loans to customers form a bank’s most profitable 
activity, but the urge to expand this side of its business to increase its profits 
is tempered by its obligation to pay cash on demand. However, most 
borrowers do not require actual cash, although a proportion of loans will be 
wanted in the form of cash, for example, for the payment of wages. 
Expanding loans will, therefore, to some extent increase the demand for cash. 
This is a fact that a banker must always bear in mind when it is considering 
whether to increase his lending.  
Banks create money by creating deposits. There are two kinds of deposits: 
actual deposits and created deposits.  When a man puts a certain sum of 
money into his account, we call it an actual/primary deposit. When a bank 
gives a loan to a person an account is opened in his name and he is credited 
with the amount of the loan.  It is sometimes said that every loan creates a 
deposit. Hence, if banking habits are well developed the money lent out by a 
bank will find its way into some deposit account in the banking system. One 
can, therefore, say that every loan creates a deposit. 
Whether a bank lends by overdraft or using a loan account, the result is the 
same, it increases the total volume of purchasing power, that is, the quantity 
of money. Banks can also create deposits by purchasing Government stock, 
which is simply a method by which banks lend to the Government. The bank 
pays for such purchases by cheques drawn on itself, and the payees of these 
cheques pay them into their banking accounts, and so again the banks create 
deposits. Thus, bank deposits are mainly created by the banks themselves . 
This power of the banks to expand credit is of enormous economic 
significance, for bank deposits are a form of purchasing power which can be 
used for the purchase of goods and services irrespective of how they have 
been created. The total quantity of money therefore depends largely on the 
credit policy of the banks . The banking system as a whole is responsible for 
the creation of a very large proportion of the deposits of the various banks. 
According to some writers, commercial banks cannot create money, they 
only lend the un-withdrawn part of their customer’s deposits. This view is 
right in so far as a single bank is concerned. However, the banking system as 
a whole can create money. In this connection, it may be pinpointed that while 
no individual bank can create deposits more than its excess reserves (here 
9/10 of the new deposits), the banking system as a whole however can create 
ten times the initial deposit. Money Multiplier or Deposit multiplier measures 
the amount of money that the Banks can create in the form of deposits with 
every unit of money they keep as reserves. It is calculated in the following 
equation: 
∆𝑑 = ∆𝑎
𝑟
