--- Page 89 ---
 
 
88 
Financial Institutions Check Your Progress 3 
1) Give a brief account of IL&FS. 
 ……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
2) Discuss the role of NFB 
 ……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
3) Describe the importance of TFCI.  
 ……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
17.14  INSURANCE SECTOR 
Insurance means compensation for financial loss. It is a monetary instrument, 
which reduces the financial risks in the events of eventualities, and provides 
financial safety. The insurance sector is a colossal one. A well-developed and 
evolved insurance sector is a boon for economic development as it provides 
long-term funds for infrastructure development at the same time strengthening 
the risk-taking ability of the country. Insurance companies generally function 
on two-dimensional landscapes which include (a) underwriting activity which 
is mainly centered on collecting premiums and honouring claims, and (b) 
investment activity which is meant to dispense assets into various investments.  
Importance of the insurance sector : Insurance capital and reserves are 
paramount hotspots of money finances of the economy. The insurance industry 
in India is playing an important role in the advancement of capital markets, 
providing finance to companies and governments and bringing forward the 
mechanisms for corporate control and risk management. Insurance companies 
additionally decrease dependence on the banking system and act as shock 
absorbers. Insurers have a counter-cyclical and settling impact on the 
economy. Insurance companies’ investment operations are influenced by up 
and down in internal as well as external factors. The changing market and 
regulatory environment stimulate insurance companies to invest not only in 
government securities and money market instruments but also in stocks which 
make them vulnerable to high risks. Therefore, insurers should have robust risk 
and investment management frameworks to deliver superior risk-adjusted 
returns to customers. The investment portfolio of insurance companies 
encompasses an extensive range of securities.  


--- Page 90 ---
 
 
89 
Other Financial 
Institutions and 
Regulations 
The Insurance industry in India is subjected to a comprehensive set of rules 
and regulations. Investment activities of insurance firms have important 
macroeconomic consequences for the allocation of funds between different 
sectors of the economy. No company can introduce a new product before 
getting prior approval from Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
of India (IRDA). IRDA regulations specify the amounts of their invested assets 
in government securities, approved investments and other investments. 
Because of these regulations, insurance companies are unable to utilize their 
fund according to their discretion. Most of the investment has been in fixed-
income securities, particularly in government securities.  
The insurance industry of India consists of 57 insurance companies of which 
24 are in the life insurance business and 33 are non-life insurers. Among the 
life insurers, Life Insurance Corporation (LIC) is the sole public sector 
company. Apart from that, among the non-life insurers, there are five public 
sector insurers- Agriculture Insurance Co. of India Ltd., National Insurance 
Co.Ltd., New India Assurance Co. Ltd, Oriental Insurance Co.Ltd., and United 
India Insurance Co.Ltd. In addition to these, there is a sole national re-insurer, 
namely, General Insurance Corporation of India (GIC Re). Other stakeholders 
in the Indian Insurance market include agents (individual and corporate), 
brokers, surveyors and third-party administrators servicing health insurance 
claims.  
17.14.1  Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC) 
The LIC had a monopoly in life insurance sector till the late 90s when the 
Insurance sector was reopened for the private sector. LIC is an Indian state-
owned insurance group and investment company headquartered in Mumbai. It 
is the largest insurance company in India. Insurance behemoth Life Insurance 
Corporation of India (LIC) is the fourth largest insurer in the world, according 
to a ranking based on life and accident & health reserves of companies in 2022 
by S&P Global Market Intelligence. LIC offers a variety of Insurance products 
to its customers. LIC is the only public sector company which existed in both 
the pre and post-reform periods.  
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDA) 
Following the recommendations of the Malhotra Committee report, in 1999, 
the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) was constituted 
as an autonomous body to regulate and develop the insurance industry. The 
IRDA was incorporated as a statutory body in April 2000. The key objective 
of the IRDA is to promote competition to enhance customer satisfaction 
through increased consumer choice and lower premiums while ensuring the 
financial security of the insurance market. The IRDA opened up the market in 
August 2000 with the invitation for applications for registrations. The Indian 
life insurance industry has experienced major changes in terms of market 
structure, size and operational practices. Life insurance companies’ 
investments are categorised as linked investments, non-linked investments and 


--- Page 91 ---
 
 
90 
Financial Institutions shareholders’ investments. The regulations prescribe a combination of 
measuring investment at market value and amortized cost. 
17.14.2  General Insurance Companies (Non-Life Insurance) 
Non-life insurance is any type of insurance other than life insurance. Non-life 
insurance may cover people, property or legal liabilities. Non-life insurance is 
a broad category. The insurance which is done for physical properties other 
than human life is known as non-life insurance. Insurance contracts that do not 
come under the ambit of life insurance are called general insurance. Non-life 
insurance is taken as a means of providing financial protection for building, 
machinery, equipment, furniture, and vehicle and merchandise items against 
the risk of fire, earthquake, accident and theft. Like life insurance, general 
insurance products come at a price in the form of a premium. Insurance 
achieves both risk transfer and risk reduction.  
In December 2000, the subsidiaries of the General Insurance Corporation of 
India were restructured as independent companies and at the same time GIC 
was converted into a national re-insurer. Parliament passed a bill de-linking the 
four subsidiaries from GIC in July 2002.  Non-life or general insurance 
companies’ contracts are short-term in nature and the liquidity needs of non-
life companies are much higher. Thus, the investible funds of general insurance 
companies chop and change broadly. Therefore, the investment portfolio of the 
general insurer should be managed prudently to enable the company to meet 
the increasing costs of business operations. 
17.15  MUTUAL FUNDS 
A mutual fund is a professionally managed investment scheme, usually run by 
an asset management company that brings together a group of people and 
invests their money in stocks, bonds and other securities. There are various 
kinds of mutual funds with a specific goal set. The Securities and Exchange 
Board of India (SEBI) has categorised mutual funds in India under four broad 
categories: 
i) Equity Mutual Funds : An equity fund is a mutual fund that invests 
principally in stocks. It can be actively or passively (index fund) 
managed. Equity funds are also known as stock funds. Stock mutual 
funds are principally categorized according to company size, the 
investment style of the holdings in the portfolio and geography. Equity 
funds aim to generate high returns by investing in the shares of 
companies of different market capitalization. They generate higher 
returns than debt funds or fixed deposits. 
ii) Debt Mutual Funds: They mainly invest in a mix of debt or fixed-income 
securities such as Treasury Bills, Government Securities, Corporate 
Bonds, Money Market instruments and other debt securities of different 


--- Page 92 ---
 
 
91 
Other Financial 
Institutions and 
Regulations 
time horizons. Generally, debt securities have a fixed maturity date and 
pay a fixed rate of interest.  
iii) Hybrid Mutual Funds : Hybrid Funds are mutual funds that provide a 
combination of more than one underlying investment asset class, such as 
stocks, bonds or cash. These funds typically invest in a mix of stocks and 
bonds. They may also be known as asset allocation funds. 
iv) Solution-oriented Mutual Funds : These funds are open-ended schemes 
created mainly for long-term planning. This category is characterized by 
a portfolio that is made up of a mix of equity stocks and bonds and will 
suit investors looking for debt-plus returns with higher levels of risk than 
fixed-income schemes.  
Mutual Fund Organisations (MFOs) with huge resources of investments of 
public and a team of experts in their employee roll analyse investment 
opportunities in various securities, bonds and financial investments. Based on 
the appraisal made by the specialists, investment decisions in the capital market 
to buy/sell the securities are taken.  The Mutual Funds are subject to SEBI 
regulations and they are monitored and inspected by SEBI.  
 Check Your Progress 4 
1) What is the significance of the insurance sector? 
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
2) Explain the various kinds of investment institutions operating in India. 
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
3) Describe the different forms of Mutual Funds.  
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
17.16  LET US SUM UP  
Besides setting up several institutions, a large number of other financial 
institutions (OFIs) cater to the needs of finance. OFIs can be classified into 
two broad categories of institutions as per their area of operation: Sector-
specific financial institutions and Investment Institutions. One of the OFIs 
is SIDBI. It is the primary financial institution for promoting, developing and 


--- Page 93 ---
 
 
92 
Financial Institutions financing the MSME (Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise) sector and 
coordination of the functions of the various Institutions engaged in similar 
activities. SIDBI also extends Nodal Agency services to the Government of 
India for schemes sponsored by various Ministries to encourage the 
implementation of modernisation and technology upgradation projects by 
manufacturing units in the MSME sector. Another institution: EXIM Bank 
provides financial assistance to exporters and importers, and is responsible for 
functioning as the principal financial institution for coordinating the working 
of institutions engaged in financing the export and import of goods and services 
to promote the country’s international trade. In this unit, we also discussed 
NABARD. The NABARD has been recognized as the apex institution for 
agricultural finance and development of rural areas. IIFCL is a wholly-owned 
Government of India company set up in 2006 to provide long-term finance to 
viable infrastructure projects through the Scheme for Financing Viable 
Infrastructure Projects through a Special Purpose Vehicle broadly referred to 
as SIFTI. IL&FS develops high-quality infrastructure and financial solutions 
to catalyze India's growth. PFC is engaged in power sector financing and 
committed to the integrated development of the power and associated sectors 
by channelling the resources and providing financial, technological, and 
managerial services. REC is engaged in the financing and promotion of 
transmission distribution and generation projects throughout India. Their main 
objective is to finance and promote rural electrification projects all over the 
country. The primary function of NHB, an apex institution of housing finance 
in India is to register, regulate and supervise HFCs. The main objective of 
TFCI is to expedite the growth of tourism infrastructure in the country by 
providing a dedicated line of credit on a long-term basis to tourism-related 
projects in the country. The insurance industry in India is playing an important 
role in the advancement of capital markets, providing finance to companies 
and governments and bringing forward the mechanisms for corporate control 
and risk management. One of the prominent insurance companies is LIC. LIC 
is an Indian state-owned insurance group and investment company that offers 
a variety of Insurance products to its customers. 
A mutual fund is a professionally managed investment scheme, usually run by 
an asset management company that brings together a group of people and 
invests their money in stocks, bonds and other securities. There are various 
kinds of mutual funds with a specific goal set. 
17.17  KEY WORDS 
Credit Rating          : 
Agency 
A credit rating agency (CRA, also called a rating 
service) is a company that assigns credit ratings, 
which rate a debtor’s ability to pay back debt by 
making timely principal and interest payments and 
the likelihood of default. Indian credit rating 
industry mainly comprises CRISIL, ICRA, CARE, 
ONICRA, FITCH and SMERA.  


--- Page 94 ---
 
 
93 
Other Financial 
Institutions and 
Regulations 
Customized loans    : The goal is to design a customized credit strategy to 
meet the needs of a particular firm or business. 
Direct finance          : Direct finance is a method of financing where 
borrowers borrow funds directly from the financial 
market without using a third-party service, such as 
a financial intermediary.   
Indirect finance       : Indirect finance is where borrowers borrow funds 
from the financial market through indirect means, 
such as through a financial intermediary.  
Institutional               : 
investors 
These are entities that pool together funds on behalf 
of others and invest those funds in a variety of 
different financial instruments and asset classes.  
Microfinance           : Microfinance, also known as microcredit, is a 
financial service that offers loans, savings and 
insurance to entrepreneurs and small business 
owners who don’t have access to traditional sources 
of capital, like banks or investors. 
17.18  SOME USEFUL BOOKS 
Annual Report (various issues) of RBI, SIDBI, IFCI, NHB, PFC, REC, TFCI, 
and IL&FS. 
Bhole, L M and ‘ Financial Institution and Markets’ , 6 th edition, Jitendra 
Mahakud (2017): Tata McGraw-Hill Education Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi  
Gurusamy, S. (2009):  Financial Services and Markets, Thomson, New Delhi. 
Khan, M Y (2017): ‘Indian Financial System’, 10th edition, Tata McGraw-Hill 
Education Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi  
Neelima, K M and Non-Banking Finance Companies in India’s Anand Kumar 
(2017): Financial Landscape, RBI Bulletin, October  
Sharma, KC (2013):  Life Insurance in India Principles and Practices, Regal 
Publication, New Delhi  
 
17.19 ANSWER/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES   
Check Your Progress 1 
1) Recognise and fill the gaps in institutions and markets in the financial 
sector, transfer funds from the surplus to the deficit sectors in the 
economy, ensuring the flow of finance in desired directions and in 
particular to priority areas of development.  
2) Direct finance, Indirect finance, discounting and rediscounting bills. 


--- Page 95 ---
 
 
94 
Financial Institutions 3) Expanding marketing channels, services like factoring, leasing etc, for 
customised loans etc. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) Extends funded and non-funded facilities for overseas turnkey projects, 
and financier and provides funded and non-funded support for project 
export contracts of Indian Entities, and financier and provides funded and 
non-funded support for project export contracts of Indian Entities. 
2) Lines of Credit (LOCs)  
3) Credit function, development function, and promotional function. 
Check Your Progress 3 
1) Refer to Section 17.8 
2) To register and supervise HFCs. It also provides refinance to HFCs, SCBs, 
RRBs and cooperative sector institutions for housing loans and directly 
lends (project finance) to borrowers in the public and private sectors to 
extend financial support to the housing programmes for the unserved and 
under-served segments of the population. 
3) Creation of tourism infrastructure, financial assistance. 
Check Your Progress 4 
1) Advancement of capital markets, providing finance to companies and 
governments and bringing forward the mechanisms for corporate control 
and risk management. 
2) Regulate and develop the insurance industry, and promote competition. 
3) Equity Mutual Funds, Debt Mutual Funds, Hybrid Mutual Funds, 
Solution-oriented Mutual Funds. 
17.20  TERMINAL QUESTIONS   
1) Describe the working of sector-specific financial institutions in meeting 
the requirements of finance of the concerned sector. 
2) “SIDBI’s nature and scope increased with time”. Explain. What are 
financial schemes for the MSMEs sector?  
3) Critically examine the financing function of NABARD. What are its 
promotional activities?  
4) “In the field of international trade EXIM Bank has been playing a very 
critical role in promoting India’s exports”.  Justify this statement.  
5) Examine the role of infrastructure financing institutions in providing 
finance to the sector.      
6) Analyse the nature and functions of investment institutions in India.    
