--- Page 81 ---
 
 
80 
Financial Institutions institutions, trade promotion bodies, and investment promotion boards to help 
create an enabling environment for supporting trade and investment. The 
Global Network of Exim Banks and Development Finance Institutions  
(G-NEXID) was set up in Geneva in March 2006 through the Bank’s initiative, 
under the auspices of UNCTAD. EXIM-Mitra  was created by EXIM bank to 
promote digital India, a one-stop solution for all export and import needs. It is 
an online platform to deliver trade-related information and provides access to 
insurance for exporters and importers.   
17.5  NATIONAL BANK FOR AGRICULTURE 
AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT (NABARD) 
NABARD, an apex institution in the field of refinancing activities in 
agriculture and rural development, was established under an Act 61 of 1981. 
The formation of NABARD was approved by the Parliament through Act 61 
of 1981. NABARD came into existence on 12 July 1982 by transferring the 
agricultural credit functions of RBI and refinance functions of the then 
Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation (ARDC). Consequent to 
the revision in the composition of share capital between the Government of 
India and RBI, NABARD today is fully owned by the Government of India.  
The NABARD has been recognized as the apex institution for agricultural 
finance. As the name suggests, the bank has been set up not only for 
agricultural finance but also for the development of rural areas. The main 
objective of NABARD can be brought under three major heads: 
i) Credit function. 
ii) Development function. 
iii) Promotional function. 
Credit functions : Framing policy and guidelines for rural financial 
institutions, providing credit facilities to issuing organizations, monitoring the 
flow of ground-level rural credit, and preparing credit plans annually for all 
districts for identification of credit potential. The bank is providing short-term, 
medium-term and long-term loans for agriculture and rural development. 
i)  NABARD provides refinancing facilities  to Commercial banks, State 
cooperative banks, Central Co-operative banks, Regional rural banks and 
Land Development banks. 
ii)   It provides refinancing to agriculture, small-scale industries and other 
village and cottage industries by lending to commercial banks. 
iii)  The bills of commercial and cooperative banks are discounted to enable 
them to finance agricultural operations. 
iv) The bank provides funds to State governments for undertaking 
developmental and promotional activities in rural areas. To promote rural 
development and to help the weaker sections, the bank refinances 


--- Page 82 ---
 
 
81 
Other Financial 
Institutions and 
Regulations 
especially regional rural banks which are set up in backward areas in 
most of the States. 
v)  Towards long-term loans, the bank is providing loans to institutions 
involved in long-term agricultural loans against the guarantee of the State 
government. 
vi)  The bank is also financing research and development of agricultural and 
rural industries. 
vii)  The bank provides finance for promoting non-farm activities and 
employment in non-farm sectors to reduce rural unemployment. 
Development and promotional functions : NABARD helps cooperative 
banks and Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) to prepare development action plans 
for themselves. It also helps RRBs and their sponsor commercial banks to enter 
into MoUs with state governments and cooperative banks to improve their 
operations. NABARD also monitors the implementation of development 
action plans of commercial banks. It provides financial support for the training 
institutes of cooperative banks, commercial banks and Regional Rural Banks 
along with providing financial assistance to cooperative banks for building 
improved management information systems, computerisation of operations 
and development of human resources. NABARD has opened branches at all 
District headquarters by which it coordinates the district development 
programmes along with the district officials. NABARD implements the policy 
of the Central Government and the RBI about agricultural credit. It helps in the 
annual credit plan of the commercial banks and co-ordinates the activities of 
commercial and cooperative banks at the district level. During natural 
calamities, such as droughts, crop failure and floods, the bank helps by 
refinancing to commercial and cooperative banks so that the farmers tide over 
their difficult period. 
Supervisory Functions: NABARD undertakes inspection of Regional Rural 
Banks (RRBs) and Cooperative Banks (other than urban/primary cooperative 
banks) under the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, of 1949. It inspects 
State Cooperative Agriculture and Rural Development Banks (SCARDBs) and 
apex non-credit cooperative societies voluntarily. It makes recommendations 
to RBI on the issue of licenses to Cooperative Banks and, the opening of new 
branches by State Cooperative Banks and Regional Rural Banks (RRBs). It 
initiates portfolio inspections besides off-site surveillance of Cooperative 
Banks and Regional Rural Banks (RRBs). 
Role and importance of NABARD : Ever since the setting up of NABARD, 
there has been a considerable increase in the distribution of agricultural credit 
both by commercial and cooperative banks. NABARD has also strengthened 
the working of Regional Rural Banks. After the setting up of NABARD, there 
has been a considerable increase in the rural finance and development of 
small-scale and cottage industries.  NABARD has played a significant role 
in improving storage facilities for agricultural commodities in the country. 


--- Page 83 ---
 
 
82 
Financial Institutions It has promoted the export of agricultural commodities which include 
vegetables and fruits. It has played a supplementary role in sustaining the 
Green Revolution in the country. White Revolution and Blue Revolution in the 
form of increased milk production and fisheries have also been contributed by 
the sustained efforts of NABARD. It also promotes research in rural banking 
in the field of agriculture and rural development. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) Explain the significance of EXIM Bank in the field of international trade.  
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
2) What are the schemes of EXIM Bank to provide finance for promoting 
exports?  
 ……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
3) Describe the role of NABRAD as an apex institution for financing 
agriculture.  
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………… 
17.6  INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE 
By the early 1990s, it was recognized that there was a need for financial 
institutions to directly access the capital markets for their funds to finance 
infrastructure projects. Thus, several infrastructure finance companies were set 
up. Some of them have become fully private like ICICI while others have been 
partly privatised like REC and PFC. Besides several private companies have 
recently become big players in the infrastructure financing space like SREI, 
L&T Finance etc. The scope for these companies is immense if they decently 
manage their assets-liabilities. 
17.7 NATIONAL BANK FOR FINANCING 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND DEVELOPMENT 
(NaBFID) 
The need for establishing a dedicated financial institution to address the long-
term infrastructure financing requirements in India was realized considering 
the nation’s GDP growth objectives and the role of infrastructure development 
towards the same. In response to this need, the National Bank for Financing 


--- Page 84 ---
 
 
83 
Other Financial 
Institutions and 
Regulations 
Infrastructure and Development Act, 2021 was passed by the Parliament in 
March 2021. It has come into force effective April 19, 2021. Reserve Bank of 
India (RBI) vide its letter dated March 8, 2022 has advised that NaBFID shall 
be regulated and supervised by RBI as an All India Financial Institution (AIFI) 
under sections 45L and 45N of the RBI Act, 1934, respectively. 
The significance of NaBFID lies in its potential to play a key role in financing 
large infrastructure projects beyond power and telecom and provide a more 
stable source of funding. This is expected to not only stimulate economic 
development and employment creation but also improve the efficiency and 
transparency of infrastructure development in the country, through the 
adoption of best practices across project lifecycles. 
NaBFID will also work towards developing a deep and liquid market for 
bonds, loans, and derivatives for infrastructure financing. It will specifically 
facilitate the development of relevant electronic and negotiated markets, 
enabling fair and accessible trade and exchange. 
NaBFID is expected to provide a supporting, technology-enabled ecosystem 
across the life-cycle of infrastructure projects as a provider, enabler, and 
catalyst for infrastructure financing. NaBFID will work towards directly or 
indirectly lending, investing, and attracting investments from private sector 
investors and institutional investors for infrastructure projects located entirely 
or partly in India. The harmonized list of sectors prescribed by the Central 
Government includes Transport and Logistics (Roads, Ports, Airports, 
Railways, Inland Waterways), Energy, Water and Sanitation, Communication, 
and Social and Commercial Infrastructure. 
The instruments and services extended to fund such project financing 
requirements will be subject to the NaBFID Lending Rate (NLR) as applicable, 
and will range across the following types, expanding with time and market 
demand: 
 Term Loans (Greenfield, brownfield, etc.) 
 Bonds or Debentures 
 Guarantees (Bid bonds, mobilization/advance payment guarantees, 
performance guarantees) 
 Letter of Comfort (Capex LC) 
Additionally, NaBFID will provide equity investment opportunities through:  
 Investment Trusts,  
 Bond subscription services,  
 Specific structured products for project development, and  
 ESG-focused lending. 


--- Page 85 ---
 
 
84 
Financial Institutions NaBFID is also committed to the development of various bonds and derivative 
markets, including domestic capital bonds, foreign currency bonds, and green 
bonds - while ensuring investor protection and the implementation of robust 
adjudication systems. 
17.8  INDIA INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE 
COMPANY LTD. (IIFCL) 
IIFCL is a wholly-owned Government of India company set up in 2006 to 
provide long-term finance to viable infrastructure projects through the Scheme 
for Financing Viable Infrastructure Projects through a Special Purpose 
Vehicle broadly referred to as SIFTI.  
The sectors eligible for financial assistance from IIFCL broadly include 
transportation, energy, water, sanitation, communication, and social and 
commercial infrastructure. IIFCL has been registered as a NBFC-ND-IFC with 
RBI since September 2013.  
Financing activities: IIFCL offers its financial support to the infrastructure 
sector through the following products/services: 
i) As part of a consortium, IIFCL provides long-term funds to commercially 
viable infrastructure projects, taking an exposure of up to 20% of Total 
Project Cost (including Subordinate Debt, if any). In the case of PPP 
projects that have the provision of compulsory buyback by the authority 
on termination, IIFCL may offer a loan with a tenor longer than other 
lenders and remain the sole lender, if necessary, after other lenders are 
paid out.  
ii)   IIFCL provides subordinate debt up to 10% of the project cost (as part of 
its exposure of up to 20% of Total Project Cost). This type of debt is 
typically treated as Quasi-Equity by lenders.  
iv) The Takeout Finance Scheme  is aimed at addressing the Asset Liability 
Mismatch and exposure constraints faced by banks by taking out loans 
from the books of the commercial banks. This helps banks to free up their 
funds for investing in newer infrastructure projects. IIFCL can lend up to 
30% of the Total Project Cost (including Direct Lending).  
v) Under the Credit Enhancement Scheme  partial credit, IIFCL provides a 
guarantee to enhance the credit rating of bonds issued by infrastructure 
companies to AA or higher for refinancing of existing loans. IIFCL can 
undertake credit enhancement to the extent of 20% of the Total Project 
Cost (40% of the Total Project Cost with backstop guarantor) subject to a 
maximum of 50% of the total amount of Project Bonds. Credit 
enhancement enables channelization of long-term funds from investors 
like insurance and pension funds in such bonds. Asian Development Bank 
(ADB) is providing a backstop guarantee facility to IIFCL for up to 50% 
of IIFCL’s underlying risk. 


--- Page 86 ---
 
 
85 
Other Financial 
Institutions and 
Regulations 
vi) IIFCL provides refinance to commercial banks and other eligible financial 
institutions (FI’s) for their loans to infrastructure projects.  
Sources of Funding : IIFCL raises funds through long-term resources from 
both domestic as well as global markets. IIFCL has also established strong 
relationships with multilateral institutions like the Asian Development Bank, 
World Bank, KfW (a German government-owned development bank) and 
European Investment Bank (EIB) and has committed lines of credit. These 
relationships with multilateral institutions have helped IIFCL in raising long-
term resources. The relationships with multilateral institutions have helped 
IIFCL in raising long-term resources.  
17.9  INFRASTRUCTURE LEASING & FINANCIAL 
SERVICES LIMITED (IL&FS) 
IL&FS is one of India’s leading infrastructure development and finance 
companies. Its central mandate is catalysing the development of innovative 
world-class infrastructure in the country. From concept to execution, IL&FS 
houses the expertise to provide the complete array of services necessary for 
successful project completion: visioning, documentation, development, 
finance, management, technology and execution. For over three decades, it has 
focused on commercializing infrastructure projects and creating value-added 
financial services to become a proactive partner in India’s growth story. It 
develops high-quality infrastructure and financial solutions to catalyze India’s 
growth. Widely acknowledged as the pioneer of Public Private Partnership 
(PPP) in India, the IL&FS Group has, through a variety of projects, 
benchmarked the private sector’s role in and commitment towards 
infrastructure development in India. With strong core skills across its distinct 
businesses, the IL&FS group has spread its expertise nationwide in widely 
varied sectors including roads, water, power, ports, area development and 
social and environmental infrastructure. Through its financial services 
verticals, it is continuously engaged in developing innovative, layered and 
competitive financial solutions for infrastructure development. With 
benchmark projects in each sector, it has established specific, replicable, stand-
alone, scalable prototypes for developing self-sustaining infrastructure 
projects.  
Sources of funding: IL&FS was formed in 1987 as an ‘RBI-registered Core 
Investment Company’ by three financial institutions, namely the Central Bank 
of India, Housing Development Finance Corporation (HDFC) and Unit Trust 
of India (UTI), to provide finance and loans for major infrastructure 
projects.  Gradually, as the organization needed better financing, it additionally 
opened itself to two large international players, namely Mitsubishi (through 
Orix Corporation Japan) and the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority. 
Subsequently, Life Insurance Corporation India, Orix and ADIA became its 
largest shareholders, a pattern that continues to this day. Currently, its 
institutional shareholders include the Life Insurance Corporation of 
India (LIC), ORIX and Abu Dhabi Investment Authority, with small 
shareholdings by a few Indian banks State Bank of India (SBI) was a 


--- Page 87 ---
 
 
86 
Financial Institutions shareholder till 2017, after which it sold its stake in the company. A few foreign 
investors including Green-spring associates remain investors in its subsidiary 
companies, especially IL&FS transportation and IL&FS infrastructure 
services.  
Role and importance of IL&FS : IL&FS infrastructure development 
initiatives have been sectorally and geographically diverse. It has strategic 
relations with governments in almost all the states and various departments of 
the Central Government and Union Territories have helped widen the IL&FS 
Group’s national footprint. Its international presence includes offices in 
Singapore, Spain, London and Dubai, as well as strong network partners in the 
USA, Tokyo, Philippines and Abu Dhabi.  
17.10  POWER FINANCE CORPORATION LTD 
(PFC) 
PFC, established in July 1986, is under the administrative control of the 
Ministry of Power. PFC was conferred the title of a 'Maharatna CPSE' in Oct., 
2021, and was classified as an Infrastructure Finance Company by the RBI on 
28th July, 2010. It is a Government of India undertaking Financial Institution 
dedicated to power sector financing and committed to the integrated 
development of the power and associated sectors by channeling the resources 
and providing financial, technological, and managerial services for ensuring 
the development of economic, reliable and efficient systems and institutions 
for sustainable development of the  Indian Power Sector. Its clientele consists 
of State Electricity Boards, State Power Utilities, State Electricity/Power 
Departments, and Other State Departments engaged in the development of 
power projects, Central Power Utilities, Joint Sector Power Utilities, 
Equipment Manufacturers; and Private Sector Power Utilities.  As the fund 
requirements for the power sector are enormous and many funding agencies 
insist on a guarantee by an Indian Financial Institution, PFC has started 
providing guarantee services subject to its satisfaction with the borrowers’ 
credibility. 
17.11  RURAL ELECTRIFICATION 
CORPORATION LTD (REC) 
Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd. was incorporated on July 25 1969 in 
New Delhi. In the year 1970, the company commenced lending operations to 
SEBs. REC was accorded Miniratna Grade-I Status in 2002 and thereafter 
conferred with Navratna status in May 2008. REC was categorised as an 
Infrastructure Finance Company (IFC) by Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in 
September 2010. REC has been accorded with the status of a ‘Maharatna’ 
Central Public Sector Enterprise on September 21,2022. As on March 31, 
2024 REC has a net worth of over Rs 78,783 crore. It is engaged in the 
financing and promotion of transmission distribution and generation projects 
throughout India. Their main objective of REC is to finance and promote rural 


--- Page 88 ---
 
 
87 
Other Financial 
Institutions and 
Regulations 
electrification projects all over the country. REC provides financial assistance 
to State Electricity Boards, State Government Departments, and Rural Electric 
Cooperatives for rural electrification projects sponsored by them through its 
extensive network of 23 offices across the country. It primarily offers long-
term loans, medium-term loans, short-term loans, debt refinance, and equity 
and equipment finance, as well as coal mine finance. The Project Offices in the 
States coordinate the programmes of REC’s financing with the concerned 
SEBs/State Power Utilities and facilitate in formulation of schemes for loan 
sanction and disbursement and implementation of schemes by the concerned 
SEBs/ State Power Utilities. 
17.12  NATIONAL HOUSING BANK (NHB) 
The National Housing Bank was established under section 6 of the National 
Housing Bank Act (1987). The bank started its operations in July 1988. Its 
headquarters is in New Delhi. It is the apex institution of housing finance in 
India and was set up as a wholly-owned subsidiary of the RBI. The primary 
function of NHB is to register, and supervise HFCs. It also provides refinance 
to HFCs, SCBs, RRBs and cooperative sector institutions for housing loans 
and directly lends (project finance) to borrowers in the public and private 
sectors to extend financial support to the housing programmes for the unserved 
and under-served segments of the population.   
17.13  TOURISM FINANCE CORPORATION OF 
INDIA (TFCI)   
TFCI has been formed as an All India Financial Institution, under the 
recommendations of the “National Committee on Tourism” constituted by the 
Planning Commission. The main objective of TFCI is to expedite the growth 
of tourism infrastructure in the country by providing a dedicated line of credit 
on a long-term basis to tourism-related projects in the country. Accordingly, 
TFCI was set up in 1989. The responsibility for setting up TFCI was initially 
entrusted to IFCI Ltd. in partnership with other All India Financial Institutions 
and Banks. TFCI raises long-term resources from the market by way of the 
Issue of Bonds besides utilising internal accruals.   
TFCI has successfully been playing the role of investment catalyst for viable 
projects in tourism sector and other related sectors and plays a dominant role 
in creating tourism infrastructure in the country. It, as a specialised financing 
institution, has contributed significantly in terms of the creation of tourism 
infrastructure throughout the country thereby generating direct employment 
opportunities. It provides financial assistance by way of rupee loans, 
subscriptions to equity/debentures and corporate loans mainly to hotel projects, 
amusement parks, ropeways, multiplexes, restaurants etc. To diversify in other 
related areas, TFCI has expanded the scope of its activities by including 
financing of infrastructure projects, real estate projects and manufacturing 
projects to a limited extent, within the scope of its activities. 
