--- Page 21 ---
 
 
20 
Financial Institutions  Where:  
∆𝑑       = increase in deposits for the whole 
banking system 
   ∆𝑎 = increase in initial deposit 
   r  =  required reserve (cash) ratio 
The percentage of deposits which a bank keeps in the form of cash is called 
the cash reserve ratio . The process described above takes place in the 
banking system as a whole. The total of bank deposits is at present many 
times as great as the total amount of cash in existence in the country, whether 
in the hands of the public or the tills of banks, so clearly the banks together 
must have expanded the volume of deposits without an equivalent amount of 
cash having been deposited with them.  
14.5.1  Limits to Credit Creation 
The supply of money depends largely on the lending policy of the banks, but 
their power to create credit is restricted. They do not have unlimited power to 
create deposits, their ability to do so is restricted in several ways: 
i) The Clearing House Imposes a Restriction on an Individual Bank: A 
single bank cannot adopt an expansionist credit policy unless the other 
banks are willing to do the same. In other words, the banks should keep 
their credit policy in line with one another, expanding or contracting 
credit together. 
ii) The Liquidity Ratio : A banker knows from experience what proportion 
of his assets to keep in liquid form, but they must be able to convert 
their other assets into cash if circumstances require it without undue 
delay and if possible, without loss. Thus, a banker’s main concern is 
with the liquidity of their assets. This limits the extent of their 
willingness to lend and the amount of investment it is prepared to 
undertake, for the banker must maintain certain liquidity rules. 
iii) The amount of cash in existence : The supply of cash or legal tender 
money is not unlimited. The government and the central bank determine 
the quantity of legal tender money available in the country. The bank’s 
power of creation of credit is limited by this quantity.  
iv) The amount of cash people prefers to hold : The monetary habits of the 
people constitute a limiting factor. If people do not put money in 
deposits in the banks but keep their cash themselves in a liquid form, 
bank deposits cannot grow and banks cannot create money. Increasing 
confidence in banking and greater use of cheques has reduced the 
demand for cash.  
v) The Collateral Security Available : Before a commercial bank grants a 
loan, it wants to know the purpose and length of time for which it is 


--- Page 22 ---
21 
Commercial Banking required and how it is to be repaid. In addition, the borrower will 
probably be asked to give the bank some kind of collateral security 
which the bank can turn into cash if the loan is not repaid within the 
stipulated time. It is, however, an important banking recipe that the first 
consideration in such cases is the character of the borrower, for the 
banker prefers a loan to be repaid and for the collateral security to be at 
his disposal only in an emergency. The more liquid the security – that 
is, the greater the ease with which it can be turned into cash without 
loss – the more acceptable it is to the bank. The amount of security 
available may tend to limit bank lending. 
vi) State of the Economy : Banks can create money only by lending money
and this depends on the state of the economy. Money is borrowed when
there are opportunities to use it in new ventures. When business
conditions are depressed, loans are not taken and banks cannot create
money. Thus, one finds that the extent to which banks can at any time
create credit depends on the general state of confidence.
vii) Monetary Policy of the Central Bank : The final restriction on the
creation of credit by commercial banks comes from the monetary
authorities. The central bank of a country can, in various ways, control
the volume of loans given by banks.  The most important control over
the expansion of bank credit, however, comes from the monetary
system.
Crowther observes that “the bank does not create money out of thin air; it 
transmutes other forms of wealth into money”. The total volume of income-
yielding securities available in the country sets the overall limit to the process 
of credit creation. But the need for keeping a cash reserve, however, small it 
may be, restricts the power of the bank to ‘create’ money ad lib. ‘Creating’ 
money involves an increase in the bank’s deposit liabilities, and the bank 
cannot afford to let its cash reserve fall below 10 per cent of its total deposit 
liabilities.  
14.6 PRINCIPLES GOVERNING DISTRIBUTION 
OF ASSETS OF COMMERCIAL BANKS 
A banker is torn between two conflicting motives; on the one hand, it would 
like to expand its loans to make more profit, and on the other, it is anxious to 
hold sufficient cash so that it can at all times fulfil its obligation to pay cash 
on demand. A banker, too, must be able to turn its assets into cash without 
loss if it is to satisfy the claims of its depositors on him in full. Cash is an 
asset that yields it no income, and so it does not wish to hold an unnecessarily 
large amount of it, so it will ‘ minimise’ its cash holdings.  A banker must 
always be prepared, if necessary, to meet abnormal demands for cash, and so 
it must hold assets in fairly liquid form which in an emergency can easily be 
turned into cash. The liquidity of its assets is therefore a banker’s primary 


--- Page 23 ---
 
 
22 
Financial Institutions concern, and the distribution of assets represents a compromise between its 
desire for profit and its desire for liquidity , for the more profitable an asset 
the less liquid it is likely to be. The more liquid assets of clearing banks 
comprise the first four items in a bank’s balance sheet: (i) notes and coins, (ii) 
balances with the Central Bank i.e. Reserve Bank of India, (iii) bills, and  
(iv) market loans — all of which can be turned into cash quickly with little if 
any, financial loss. One aspect of liquidity is the ‘ shift-ability’ of the asset 
that is, the ease with which it can be passed on to some other institutions, 
such as the central bank. Most bank assets are shiftable in varying degrees, 
except those advances which are supposed to be supported simply by the 
good name of the borrower. 
14.6.1  Liquidity versus Profitability of Assets 
A bank must conduct its affairs to maintain adequate liquidity. The aim of 
every bank is not only to cover its expenses but also to make maximum 
profit. It endeavours to keep its assets in such forms as to yield maximum 
income. There is a clash between the objectives of liquidity and profitability. 
The most liquid of all assets is money itself. If a bank were to attend 
exclusively to the objective of maintaining liquidity, it would keep all its 
assets in the form of money. But money is the most barren of all investments 
because it does not yield any income whatsoever. On the other hand, if the 
bank were to keep its assets in the form of long-term loans, income from the 
assets would be high, but liquidity would be very low. Liquidity and income-
yielding capacity are the two opposite criteria for every bank based on which 
it has to decide the nature of its assets . The more liquid the assets, the less 
income-yielding they will be, and vice versa. The secret of success for a bank 
lies in striking a sound balance between liquidity and profitability.  Every 
bank divides its assets into forms of various degrees of liquidity and 
profitability. Some of its assets are kept in the form of cash which is very 
liquid, though non-income yielding, some assets take the form of property 
which is of low liquidity but yields good income. In between the two, lies 
other assets with different degrees of liquidity and income-yielding capacity. 
The traditional concept of liquidity has been replaced by the concept of shift-
ability. The shift-ability concept has a much wider breadth and shift-ability 
has made possible the flow of bank credit amongst a larger number of 
borrowers and for longer dates without much impairing the security of 
lending. In recent years the concept of liquidity has undergone further 
changes. The term loans are liquidated by the anticipated income of the 
borrower. In the case of the anticipated income concept, the borrower has to 
save and repay their loans out of earnings. This concept has the advantage of 
financing durable consumer goods because loans made for the purchase of 
durable consumer goods cannot be repaid by sale nor can they be shifted to 
the open market or the central bank. These loans can be later repaid out of the 
expected income of the borrower. 


--- Page 24 ---
23 
Commercial Banking 14.7  RECENT TRENDS AND PERFORMANCE OF 
BANKING INDUSTRY IN INDIA 
Over the years, the Indian banking industry has experienced an upward 
trajectory majorly supported by strong economic growth, rising disposable 
incomes and easier access to credit. The last few years have seen fast growth 
in digital modes of payments which has also supported the growth of the 
Indian banking industry. 
As of April 2024, there were 581 banks actively using UPI. The total number 
of digital transactions during this period amounted to 15.08 billion, with a 
total value of US$ 25.27 billion (Rs. 2.1 trillion). 
In recent years, India has also experienced a rise in fintech and 
microfinancing. India’s digital lending stood at US$ 75 billion in FY18 and is 
estimated to reach US$ 1 trillion by FY23 driven by the five-fold increase in 
digital disbursements. The Indian fintech market has attracted US$ 29 billion 
in funding over 2,084 deals so far (January 2017-July 2022), accounting for 
14% of global funding and ranking second in terms of deal volume. By 2025, 
India’s fintech market is expected to reach Rs 6.2 trillion (US$ 83.48 billion). 
According to the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), India’s banking sector is 
sufficiently capitalised and well-regulated. 
In past decade, the Indian banking industry has rolled out various innovative 
models. One of them is Small Finance Banks (SFB) like Ujjivan Small 
Finance Bank, AU Small Finance Bank etc.  RBI granted licenses to Small 
Finance Banks in 2015 and since then, they have come a long way in 
providing banking services to the masses. In subsequent years, RBI has 
granted two additional SFB licenses taking the total SFBs in the country to 
12. Out of these Fincare, Small Finance Bank Limited (“Fincare SFB”) has
merged with and into AU Small Finance Bank Limited (“AU SFB”), 
effective 1st April 2024. Thus, total number of SFBs is now 11. SFB has 
emerged as a new category of banks in India that cater primarily to the 
financially unserved and under-served sections of society. These banks 
provide basic banking services to unbanked and under-banked populations 
thus supporting financial inclusion. Small Finance Banks are likely to play a 
significant role in the future of banking in India because of their approach of 
reaching the unreached by extending credit to small businesses, micro-
enterprises, and low-income households. SFBs are different from 
Commercial banks in terms of their capital requirement, services offered, 
loan products and target customers. Unlike Commercial banks, SFBs offer 
basic banking services only and have a minimum capital requirement of 
₹ 200 crores as against the capital requirement of ₹ 500 crore in the case of a 
commercial bank. 
Payments Banks is another model of commercial banking in India. However, 
it differs from regular banking as the Payments banks are neither allowed to 


--- Page 25 ---
 
 
24 
Financial Institutions lend money or issue credit cards to their customers. At present 4 Payments 
banks are working in the country. 
Another innovative banking model is neo-banking. Neobanks are digital-only 
banking platforms that operate only online. Thus, they do not have a physical 
presence. Sometimes, transactions in traditional banks could require a lot of 
time and effort. Neobanks provides a seamless online experience where 
customers can create accounts by themselves and use their offerings hassle-
free. Since RBI does not permit fully digital banking establishments yet, 
neobanks in the country use partnerships with physical banks to deliver some 
of their key services. 
In the past decade, India has also focused on increasing its banking sector 
reach, through various schemes like the Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana and 
India Post payment banks. India Post Payments Bank (IPPB) is an accessible, 
affordable and reliable bank for the common man. With the help of just an 
Aadhaar Card, any person in a village can avail of banking facilities provided 
by IPPB by requesting the same from the local Postman/Gramin Dak Sevak. 
Schemes like these coupled with major banking sector reforms like digital 
payments, neo-banking, a rise of Indian NBFCs and fintech have 
significantly enhanced India’s financial inclusion and supported the credit 
cycle in the country. The digital payments system in India has evolved the 
most among 25 countries with India’s Immediate Payment Service (IMPS) 
being the only system at level five in the Faster Payments Innovation Index 
(FPII). India’s Unified Payments Interface (UPI) has also revolutionized real-
time payments and has strived to increase its global reach in recent years. 
Trend and Performance of Commercial Banks since 2020-21 
During 2020-21, scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) reported a discernible 
improvement in their asset quality, capital buffers and profitability, 
notwithstanding the disruptions of the pandemic. While credit offtake 
remained subdued, elevated deposit growth on the liabilities side was 
matched by growth in investments on the assets side. 
The Indian banking sector remained resilient in 2021-22 and 2022-23 so far, 
as banks witnessed healthy balance sheet growth on a broad-based 
acceleration in credit. Deposit growth moderated from the COVID-19-
induced precautionary surge. Augmented capital buffers, better asset quality 
and enhanced profitability indicators reflected their robustness. 
Reserve Bank of India, on June 27,2024 released the 29th issue of the 
Financial Stability Report (FSR), which reflects the collective assessment of 
the Sub-Committee of the Financial Stability and Development Council 
(FSDC) on the resilience of the Indian financial system and risks to financial 
stability. 
 


--- Page 26 ---
25 
Commercial Banking Highlights of the report are as follows: 
 The global economy is facing heightened risks from prolonged
geopolitical tensions, elevated public debt, and the slow progress in the
last mile of disinflation. Despite these challenges, the global financial
system has remained resilient, and financial conditions stable.
 The Indian economy and the financial system remain robust and resilient,
anchored by macroeconomic and financial stability. With improved
balance sheets, banks and financial institutions are supporting economic
activity through sustained credit expansion.
 The capital to risk-weighted assets ratio (CRAR) and the common equity
tier 1 (CET1) ratio of scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) stood at 16.8
per cent and 13.9 per cent, respectively, at end-March 2024.
 SCBs’ gross non-performing assets (GNPA) ratio fell to a multi-year low
of 2.8 per cent and the net non-performing assets (NNPA) ratio to 0.6 per
cent at end-March 2024.
 Macro stress tests for credit risk reveal that SCBs would be able to
comply with minimum capital requirements, with the system-level
CRAR in March 2025 projected at 16.1 per cent, 14.4 per cent and 13.0
per cent, respectively, under baseline, medium and severe stress
scenarios. These scenarios are stringent conservative assessments under
hypothetical shocks and the results should not be interpreted as forecasts.
 Non-banking financial companies (NBFCs) remain healthy, with CRAR
at 26.6 per cent, GNPA ratio at 4.0 per cent and return on assets (RoA) at
3.3 per cent, respectively, at end-March 2024.
Check Your Progress 3 
1) Discuss some recent trends experienced in the Banking sector in India.
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
2) What are the limitations on banks in credit creation?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
3) Why is there a clash between liquidity and profitability? What is the
concept of shift-ability?
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………


--- Page 27 ---
 
 
26 
Financial Institutions 14.8 LET US SUM UP 
Financial intermediaries like banks are unique and specialize in performing 
functions such as (a) mobilizing savings and channelling them to the most 
productive users, and (b) acting as efficient conduits for payments.   
Banks perform a large variety of functions. The main banking services are: 
Acceptance of money on deposit from the public broadly speaking, these 
deposits are of three main types viz., current, savings and fixed, which can be 
reclassified under two main heads of demand and time deposits.  Commercial 
banks lend money, process payments, issue bank drafts and checks, and offer 
safety deposit boxes for items and documents. Commercial Banks provide 
Grant of credit  to all sectors of the economy, and not merely to trade and 
commerce. This is done in various forms such as loans and advances, 
discounting of bills, and investment in open-market securities.   
Modern commercial banking is based on a system of fractional reserves. This 
is why banks all over the world keep only a small portion of the deposits in 
liquid form. The balance is invested and it is in this way, through the making 
of loans and the purchase of securities, that profits are made.   
The creation of credit is a major function of a commercial bank.  When a 
bank advances loans, there tends to be a multiple expansion of credit in the 
banking system. Primary deposits serve as a basis for creating derivative 
deposits, that is, credit creation, and for increasing the money supply.  
However, there are various limitations to the ability of banks to create credit. 
The more liquid assets comprise cash, money at call and short notice and 
bills. The banks must strike a careful balance between their obligation to their 
customers and the requirements of their shareholders.   
Bankers are to strike a balance between two conflicting objectives.  The 
distribution of bank assets is the result of a compromise between (a) the 
necessity always to be able to pay cash on demand, and (b) the desire for 
profit. The more liquid the asset, the less profit it will generally yield to the 
bank. Cash is the most liquid asset – earning no profit at all.   
Banks not only encourage savings but also constitute the agency through 
which even small sums saved by individuals find their way to profitable 
investments. Banks channelise funds according to priorities.  They are, 
therefore, in a special position to encourage those industries that are high up 
on the list of priorities. The more capital formation the faster the economic 
advancement of the country.  
Over the years, the Indian banking industry has experienced an upward 
trajectory majorly supported by strong economic growth, rising disposable 
incomes and easier access to credit. In past decade, banking sector in India 
has rolled out various innovative models surrounding, digital payments, neo-
banking, Small Finance Banks (SFB) etc. These developments are poised to 
take India’s financial system to newer heights. 


--- Page 28 ---
27 
Commercial Banking 14.9 KEY WORDS  
Banks  :   Financial institutions that accept deposits and 
make loans. 
Bill of exchange  : 
(or draft) 
A negotiable instrument with three parties to the 
agreement the drawer of the order, the drawee, 
who is ordered to make payment, and the payee. 
For instance, a commercial bank cheque is a draft 
on the bank by the depositor payable to a 
designated payee. 
Cash reserve ratio      : 
(CRR) 
The fraction of deposits that the RBI requires to be 
kept as reserves by the banks. 
Central Bank  : The Government agency oversees the banking 
system and is responsible for the amount of money 
and credit supplied to the economy.  In India, the 
Reserve Bank of India is the Central Bank of the 
country. 
Credit Creation  : The power of the banks to multiply loans and 
advances through creating deposits. 
Derivative Deposits     : 
Differentiated  : 
Banking  
These consist of deposits created by the banks in 
the process of granting credit. The loan sanctions 
and credited to the accounts of the borrowers 
create new deposits. Since a derivative deposit is 
actively created by the bank, it increases the total 
stock of money available to the community. The 
creation of derivative deposits is identical to what 
is commonly known as credit creation by 
commercial banks. 
A specialised banking identity that serves the 
underserved segments of the economy/society 
efficiently. 
Liquidity  : The relative ease and speed with which an asset 
can be converted into cash. 
Primary Deposit  :  A deposit account opened by a bank by accepting 
cash from the public. 
Vault cash  : Currency that is physically held by banks and 
stored in vaults overnight. 
14.10 SOME USEFUL BOOKS 
Auerbach, Robert D. (1983):  Financial Markets and Institutions , 
Macmillan Publishing Co. Inc., New York 
(Chapter – 18). 


--- Page 29 ---
 
 
28 
Financial Institutions Crowther, Geoffrey (1941):  ‘ An Outline Of Money ’, Thomas Nelson and 
Sons Ltd., London, UK  
Gupta, Suraj B. (1985):  Monetary Economics; Institutions, Theory 
and Policy , S. Chand and Company, New 
Delhi (Chapter – 5). 
Hubbard, R Glenn (2002):  Money, the Financial System, and the 
Economy, Addison Wesley, New York 
(Chapter 12, 13 and 14). 
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2000):  Financial Markets and Institutions ; Addison 
Wesley, New York (Chapter 15 & 16). 
Newlyn, W.T. (1971):   Theory of Money , 2nd edition, Oxford 
University Press, UK 
Ritter, Lawrence S.,:  Principles of Money, Banking and Financial  
William L. Silber,  and  Markets, 12th edition, Pearson, London, UK  
Gregory F. Udell (2007) 
14.11 ANSWERS/HINTS TO CHECK YOUR 
PROGRESS EXERCISES 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) A profit-seeking institution which pays interest at a low rate to the 
depositors and charges a higher rate of interest to the borrowers and in 
this way, the bank earns a profit. Banks are dealers in debt- A deposit is a 
debt which the bank owes to the depositor; a banknote is a sort of 
promissory note. 
2) They act as middlemen between lenders and borrowers, creating and 
issuing financial obligations of claims against themselves to acquire 
profitable financial claims against others. A chief function of an 
intermediary is to provide liquidity.  
3) Accepting Deposits, Liability-Asset transformation, Risk transformation, 
Discounting Bills of Exchange, Loans and Advances. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) Retail banking is the visible face of banking to the general public, with 
bank branches located in abundance in most major cities. Corporate 
banking, also known as business banking , refers to the aspect of 
banking that deals with corporate customers. 
2) Refer to Section 14.4 
3) A system in which banks provide a wide variety of financial services, 
including commercial and investment services. It combines the services 
of a commercial bank and an investment bank, providing all services 


--- Page 30 ---
29 
Commercial Banking from within one entity. It helps banks to diversify risk, lower costs, and 
handle changes in the type of product demanded. 
4) Refer to Sub-section 14.4.3
Check Your Progress 3 
1) Refer to Section 14.7
2) Banks are dependent on other banks to maintain liquidity ratio, the
amount of cash in existence, and the amount of cash people prefer to
hold.
3) Refer to Sub-section 14.6.1
14.12  TERMINAL QUESTIONS 
1) Explain the concept of a Bank.  What are its functions?
2) How do commercial banks create credit?  Are there any limitations on
the power of the bank to create credit?  Give reasons for your answer.
3) Examine the conflict between liquidity and profitability. How do banks
strike a sound balance between these two?
4) Point out the significance of the banking system in promoting the
economic development of a country.
5) Write a note on recent trends in the banking industry in India.
